

1,1 Arius and the Arians who derive from him came directly after this 
time of Melitius and St. Peter the bishop of Alexandria. Arius flourished 
during the episcopate of Peter’s successor, the holy bishop Alexander, 
who deposed him amid much turmoil and with a great council. For Alex¬ 
ander removed him from office and expelled him from the church and 
the city, as a great evil which had come to the world. (2) They say that 
Arius was Libyan, but that he had become a presbyter in Alexandria. He 
presided over the church called the Church of Baucalis. All the catholic 
churches in Alexandria < are > under one archbishop, and presbyters have 
been assigned to each particular church to meet the ecclesiastical needs 
of the residents whose < homes are* > near each church. These are also 
called quarters and lanes by the inhabitants of Alexandria. 

1,3 Arius was born during the reign of the great and blessed emperor 
Constantine, the son of Constantius in his old age. Constantius was the 
son of the emperor Valerian, < who > himself had ruled jointly with 
Diocletian, Maximian and the others. (4) Everyone knows that Constan¬ 
tine, the father of Constantius, Constans and Crispus, was admirable in 
the practice of Christianity and the apostolic and prophetic faith of the 
fathers, which had not been adulterated in the holy churches until the 
time of Arius himself. But Arius managed to detach a large number [from 
the church.] 

,1 A spirit of Satan, as scripture says, entered this Arius who was 
Alexander’s presbyter, and incited him to stir up the dust against the 
church—< just as > no small fire was lit from him, and it caught on nearly 
the whole Roman realm, especially the east. Even today his sect has not 
stopped battling against the true faith. 

,2 But at that time Arius was to all appearances a presbyter, and 
there were many fellow presbyters of his in each church. (There are many 
churches in Alexandria, including the recently built Caesarium, as it is 
called, which was originally the Adrianum and later became the Licinian 
gymnasium or palace. (3) But later, in Constantius’ time, it was decided 
to rebuild it as a church. Gregory the son of Melitian, and Arian, began 
it, and the blessed Athanasius, the father of orthodoxy, finished it. It was 
burned in Julian’s time, and rebuilt by the blessed bishop Athanasius him¬ 
self. (4) But as I said there are many others, the one called the Church of 
Dionysius, and those of Theonas, Pierius, Serapion, Persaea, Dizya, Men- 
didius, Ammianus, and the church Baucalis and others.) 

2,5 A presbyter named Colluthus served in one of these, Carpones in 
another, Sarmatas in another, and the aforesaid Arius, who was in charge 
of one of these churches. (6) It is plain that each of these caused some dis¬ 
cord among the laity by his expositions, when, at the regular services, he 
taught the people entrusted to his care. Some were inclined to Arius, but 
others to Colluthus, others to Carpones, others to Sarmatas. Since each of 
them expounded the scripture differently in his own church, from their 
preference and high regard for their own presbyter some people called 
themselves Colluthians, and others called themselves Arians. (7) And in 
fact Colluthus < too > taught some perversions, but his sect did not survive 
and was scattered immediately. And if only this were also true of Arius’ 
insane faith, or better, unfaith—or better, wicked faith! 

3,1 For in his later years he was inspired by vanity to depart from the 
prescribed path. He was unusually tall, wore a downcast expression and 
was got up like a guileful serpent, able to steal every innocent heart by his 
villainous outer show. For he always wore a short cloak and a dalmatic 2 
was pleasant in his speech, and was constantly winning souls round by 
flattery. (2) For example, what did he do but lure all of seventy virgins 
away from the church at one time! And the word is that he drew seven 
presbyters away, and twelve deacons. 3 And his plague immediately spread 
to bishops, for he convinced Secundus of Pentapolis and others to be car¬ 
ried away with him. (3) But all this went on in the church without the 
knowledge of the blessed Alexander, the bishop, until Melitius, the bishop 
of Egypt from the Thebaid whom I mentioned, who was regarded as an 
archbishop himself—the affair of Melitius had not yet reached the point 
of wicked enmity. (4) Moved by zeal, then—he did not differ in faith, 
only in his show of would-be righteousness, < because of > which he did 
the world great harm himself, as I have explained. Well then, Melitius, the 
archbishop in Egypt but supposed to be under Alexander’s jurisdiction, 
brought this to the attention of the archbishop Alexander. As I have said, 
Melitius was contemporary with the blessed bishop and martyr Peter. 

3,5 When Melitius had given all this information about Arius—how 
he had departed from the truth, had defiled and ruined many, and had 
gradually weaned his converts away from the right faith—the bishop sent 
for Arius himself and asked whether what he had been told about him was 
true. (6) Arius showed neither hesitancy nor fear but brazenly coughed 
his whole heresy up from the first—as his letters show and the inves¬ 
tigation of him at the time. (7) And so Alexander called the presbytery 
together, and certain other bishops who were there [at the time], and held 
an examination and interrogation of Arius. But since he would not obey 
the truth Alexander expelled him and declared him outcast in the city. 
But the virgins we spoke of were drawn away from the faith with him, and 
the clergy we mentioned, and a great throng of others. 
,1 But though Arius stayed in the city for a long time, the confes¬ 
sor and martyr Melitius immediately died. Arius, then, destroyed many 
by instigating schisms and leading everyone astray. Later though, since 
he had been discovered and exposed in the city and excommunicated, 
he fled from Alexandria and made < his > way to Palestine. (2) And on 
his arrival he approached each bishop with fawning and flattery in the 
hope of gaining many supporters. And some received him, while others 
rebuffed him. 

4,3 Afterwards this came to the ears of the bishop Alexander, and 
he wrote encyclical letters to each bishop which are still preserved by 
the scholarly, about seventy in all. He wrote at once to Eusebius in Cae¬ 
sarea—he was alive—and to Macarius of Jerusalem, Asclepius in Gaza, 
Longinus in Ascalon, Macrinus in Jamnia, and others; and in Phoenicia 
to Zeno, a senior bishop in Tyre, and others, along with < the bishops > 
in Coele Syria. (4) When the letters had been sent reproving those who 
had received Arius, each bishop replied to the blessed Alexander with 
his explanation. (5) And some wrote deceitfully, others truthfully, some 
explaining that they had not received him, others, that they had received 
him in ignorance, and others that they had done it to win him by hospital¬ 
ity. And this is a long story. 

,1 Later, when Arius found that letters had been sent to the bishops 
everywhere, and that afterwards he was turned away from every door 
and none but his sympathizers would take him in any more— (2) (for the 
elderly senior bishop of Nicomedia, Eusebius, was a sympathizer of his 4 
together with Lucius, his colleague in Nicomedia. And so was Leontius, the 
eunuch in Antioch who had not yet been entrusted with the episcopate, 
and certain others. Since all of them belonged to the same noxious brother¬ 
hood, Eusebius sheltered him for some time). (3) And so at that time this 
Arius wrote and addressed letters full of all sorts of foolishness, which 
contained the whole of his heretical creed, to Eusebius in Nicomedia, this 
before he had come to him in Nicomedia, putting in them no more than 
what he really thought. 1 feel obliged to offer one of them here which has 
come into my hands, so that the readers can see that 1 have neither said 
nor am saying anything slanderous against anyone. Here is the letter: 
,1 Greetings in the Lord from Arius, unjustly persecuted by Pope Alexan¬ 
derfor the all-conquering truth of which you too are a defender, to the most 
beloved man of God, the faithful and orthodox Master Eusebius. 

,2 As my father Ammonius is arriving in Nicomedia it seems to me rea¬ 
sonable and proper to address you through him, at the same time recalling 
your characteristic love and [kindly] disposition toward the brethren for the 
sake of God and his Christ. For the bishop is harassing and persecuting us 
severely, and stirring up every sort of evil against us, (3) so that he has driven 
us from the city as godless men because we do not agree with his public 
declaration, “Always God, always a Son. Together with a Father, a Son. The 
Son co-exists with God without origination, ever begotten, begotten without 
origination. Not by a thought or a moment of time is God prior to the Son, 
[but] there is ever a God, ever a Son, the Son from God himself." (4) And as 
your brother in Caesarea, Eusebius, and Theodotus, Paulinus, Athanasius, 
Gregory, Aetius and all the bishops in the east say that God is prior to the Son 
without beginning, they have become anathema—except for the ignorant 
sectarians Philogonius, Hellanicus and Macarius, some of whom say that 
the Son is an eructation and others, an uncreated emanation. (5) And to 
these impieties we cannot even listen, not if the sectarians threaten us with 
a thousand deaths. 

6,6 But what is it that we say and believe, and that we have taught and 
teach ? That the Son is not uncreated or in any respect part of an uncre¬ 
ated being, or made of anything previously existent. He was brought into 
being by the will and counsel [of God], before all times and before all ages, 
as unbegotten God in the fullest sense, and unalterable; and before he was 
begotten, created, determined or established, he did not exist. (7) But we are 
persecuted because we have said, “The Son has a beginning but God is with¬ 
out beginning.” We are also persecuted because we have said, “He is made 
from nothing.” But we have so said in the sense that he is not a part of God 
or made from any thing previously existent. It is for this reason that we are 
persecuted; the rest you know. 

I pray for your good health in the Lord, my true fellow Lucianist Eusebius; 
be mindful of my afflictions. 

7,1 Moreover, I subjoin another letter written in supposed self-defense 
from Nicomedia by Arius to the most holy Pope Athanasius and sent by 
him to Alexandria. Once again it is filled, to an incomparably worse degree, 
with the blasphemous expressions of his venom. This is the letter:
,2 Greetings in the Lord from the presbyters and deacons to our blessed 
Pope and bishop, Alexander. 

,3 Our faith which we have received from our forefathers and learned 
from you as well, blessed Pope, is as follows. We know that one God, the only 
ingenerate, the only eternal, who alone is without beginning, only is the true 
God, alone has immortality, alone is wise, alone good, alone sovereign, alone 
judge with the governance and care of all, immutable and unalterable, just 
and good, < the Lord *> of the Law and Prophets and of the New Testament — 
that this God has begotten an only Son before eternal times, (4) and through 
him has made the ages and the rest. He has begotten him not in appear¬ 
ance but in truth and brought him into being, immutable and unalterable, 
by his own will; (5) God’s perfect creature but not like any other creature; 
an offspring but not like any other offspring; (6) and not an emanation, as 
Valentinus believed the Father’s offspring to be; nor as Mani represented the 
offspring as a co-essential part of the Father; nor like Sabellius, who, dividing 
the Unity, said “Son-Father”; nor as Hieracas called him a light kindledfrom 
a light, or a lamp become two; (7) nor priorly existent and later generated or 
created anew as a Son. You yourself, blessed Pope, have very often publicly 
denounced those who give these explanations in the church and assembly. 
But as we say, He is a Son created by the will of God before the times and 
ages, who has received his life, being and glory from the Father, the Father 
subsisting together with him. For by giving him the inheritance of all things 
the Father did not deprive himself of his possession of ingeneracy in himself, 
for he is the source of all. 

8,1 Thus there are three entities, a Father, a Son and a Holy Spirit. And 
God, who is the cause of all, is the sole and only being without beginning. But 
the Son, who was begotten of the Father though not in time, and who was 
created and established before the ages, did not exist before his begetting 
but was alone brought into being before all things by the Father alone, not 
in time. (2) Nor is he eternal, or co-eternal and co-uncreated with the Father. 
Nor does he have a being simultaneous with the Father’s, as some speak of 
things [which are naturally] related to something else, thus introducing two 
uncreateds. But God is before all as a Unit and thefirst principle of all things. 
And thus he is also before Christ, as we have learned fromyou when you have 
preached publicly < in > the church. 

,3 Thus, in that the Son has his being from God < who > has provided 
him with life, glory and all things, God is his first cause. For God is his ruler, 
as his God and prior to him in existence, because the Son originates from 
him. (4) And if “out of the belly , 1 and “I came forth from the Father and am 
come, ” 7 8 are taken by some to mean that he is part of a co-essential God and 
an emanation, the Father must be composite, divisible and mutable—and 
in their opinion the incorporeal God has a body and, given their premises, 
is subject to the consequences of corporeality. We pray for your good health 
in the Lord, blessed Pope. (5) Arius, Aeithales, Achillas, Carpones, Sarma- 
tas, Arius, presbyters; the deacons Euzoeus, Lucius, Julius, Menas, Helladius, 
Gains; the bishops Secundus of Pentapolis, Theonas of Libya, Pistus —the 
bishop the Arians consecrated for Alexandria. 

g,r Now that matters had been stirred up in this way, Alexander wrote 
to the emperor Constantine. And the blessed emperor summoned Arius 
and certain bishops, and interrogated them. (2) But < with the support > 
of his co-religionists Arius at first denied the charge before the emperor, 
while inwardly hatching the plot against the church. And after summoning 
him the blessed Constantine, as though to some degree inspired < by > the 
Holy Spirit, addressed him saying, “I trust in God that if you are holding 
something back and denying it, the Lord of all has the power to confound 
you speedily, especially since it is by him that you have sworn.” Hence 
Arius was indeed caught holding the same opinions, and was exposed 
before the emperor. 

g,3 But he made a similar denial again, and many of his defenders peti¬ 
tioned the emperor for him through Eusebius of Nicomedia. But mean¬ 
while the emperor was moved with zeal, and wrote a long circular against 
Arius and his creed to the whole Roman realm, filled with all sorts of wis¬ 
dom and truthful sayings. (4) It is still preserved among the scholarly and 
begins, “The most high Augustus Constantine, to Arius and the Arians. A 
bad expositor is in very truth the image and representation of the devil.” 9 
(5) Then, after some other remarks and after giving a long refutation of 
Arius from the sacred scripture, he also indignantly directed a line from 
Homer against him and quoted it, and I feel that I must quote it here as 
well. (6) It goes, “Come now, Ares Arius, there is a need for shields. Do this 
not, we pray; let Aphrodite’s speech restrain thee.”
10,i n Arius wished to be received back into the church in Constanti¬ 
nople, and Eusebius pressed for this and had great influence with the 
emperor, and kept pestering the bishop of Constantinople at that time. 
The bishop did not wish to be in the same fellowship with Arius or enter 
into communion with him, and was troubled and groaned, but Eusebius 
said, “If you won’t do it by your own choice he’ll come in with me tomor¬ 
row at the dawn of the Lord’s Day, and what can you do about it?” 

10,2 That most pious and godfearing bishop, Alexander, bishop of the 
best of cities—(he and the bishop in Alexandria had the same name)— 
spent the whole day after he heard that, and the night, in groans and 
mourning, praying and beseeching God either to take his life so that he 
would not be polluted by communion with Arius, or to work some won¬ 
der. And his prayer was answered. (3) Arius went out that night from the 
need to relieve himself, went to the privy, sat down in the stalls inside, 
and suddenly burst and expired. Thus, he was overtaken and surrendered 
his life in a smelly place, just as he had belched out a dirty heresy, 

11,1 When this was over the emperor felt concerned for the church, 
because by now many members often differed with one another and 
there were many schisms. He therefore convened an ecumenical council, 
and the names of 318 bishops are preserved to this day. And they con¬ 
demned Arius’ creed in the city of Nicaea, and confessed the orthodox 
and unswerving creed of the fathers, which has been handed down to us 
from the apostles and prophets. (2) After the bishops had signed this and 
condemned the insane Arian sect, < peace* > was restored. They passed 
certain ecclesiastical canons at the council besides, and at the same time 
decreed with regard to the Passover that there must be one unanimous 
concord in the celebration of God’s holy and most excellent day. For it 
was variously observed by people; some kept it early, some between [the 
disputed dates], but others, late. (3) And in a word, there was a great deal 
of controversy at that time. But through the blessed Constantine God 
directed the right ordering of these things for the sake of peace. 

11,4 After Arius had been condemned and these measures taken Alex¬ 
ander died that same year after Achillas had succeeded him, but Theo- 
nas was consecrated too, by the Melitians. Then the blessed Athanasius 
succeeded Achillas after he had been bishop for three months. 12 Athana- 
sius was Alexander’s deacon at that time, and had been sent by him to 
court; as Alexander’s death approached he had ordered that the episco¬ 
pate be conferred on Athanasius. (5) But the custom at Alexandria is that 
the consecrators do not delay after the death of a bishop; < the consecra¬ 
tion* > is held at once for the sake of peace, to avoid conflicts among the 
laity with some for one candidate and some for another. (6) Since Athana¬ 
sius was not there they were forced to consecrate Achillas. But the throne 
belonged to the person called by God and designated by the blessed Alex¬ 
ander, and the priesthood was prepared for him. 

rr,7 Thus Athanasius arrived and was consecrated. He was very much a 
zealot for the faith and a protector of the church, and by now there were 
[schismatic] services everywhere, and a splinter group of laity formed by 
the so-called Melitians, for the reason I gave in my piece on Melitius. In 
his desire to achieve the unification of the church Athanasius accused, 
threatened, admonished, and no one would listen. (8) This was the reason 
for all the intrigues and plots against him, the extremity of his God-given 
zeal. And so he was subjected to banishments too because of his excom¬ 
munication by the Arians with the highly unjust secular power. (9) But 
enough about the blessed Athanasius. His story has been told in full detail 
in the above description of Melitius. 

r2,r Now Arius was infused with the power of the devil, and wagged 
his tongue against his own Master with shameless impudence—originally 
from his supposed desire to expound the words of Solomon in his Prov¬ 
erbs, “The Lord created me a beginning of his ways. Before the age he 
set me up in the beginning, before he made the earth, before he made 
the depths, before the springs of waters came forth, before the mountains 
were settled, before all hills he begot me.” 13 (2) This became the introduc¬ 
tion of his error; neither < he himself > nor his disciples were ashamed 
to call the creator of all things, the Word begotten of the Father without 
beginning and not in time, a creature. 

r2,3 But then, on the basis of this one passage, he directed his malig¬ 
nant mind into many evil paths, < he himself > and his successors, and 
they set out to utter ten thousand blasphemies and more against the Son 
of God and the Holy Spirit. (4) They broke the front, as it were, and con¬ 
cord of the holy, orthodox faith and church, [though] not by their own 
power or wisdom. The deluded people who were [truly] inclined to join 
them were few, but many gradually came in from hypocrisy; and many, 
besides, were forced into communion with them because they had < no 
way to resist* >. And no one < of sound faith* > was their agent, but the 
care< less >ness of the faithful first, and the protection of emperors. 

12,5 The beginning < came with > the emperor Constantius, who was a 
meek and good man in all other respects and who, as the son of the great 
and perfect Constantine with his piety and unwavering observance of the 
right faith, was pious himself, and good in many ways. (6) But he was 
mistaken only in this matter, his failure to follow the faith of his fathers— 
not by his own fault, but because of those who will give account at the 
day of judgment, the bishops in appearance, so-called, but corrupters of 
God’s true faith. (7) These must give account, both for the faith and for the 
persecution of the church, and the many wrongs and murders that have 
been committed in the churches because of them; and for the vast num¬ 
bers of laity who still today are suffering affliction under the open sky; and 
for Constantius of blessed memory himself who, since he did not know 
the orthodox faith, was led astray by them and in his ignorance deferred 
to them as priests. For he was not aware of the eror of the blindness and 
heresy in them which was caused by the devil’s plot. 

13,1 Secondly, their gang of snakes gained further strength through 
Eudoxius, who wormed his way into the confidence of the most pious and 
God-loving emperor Valens and, once again, corrupted his ear. 14 The rea¬ 
son they could maintain their position was Valens’ baptism by Eudoxius. 
(2) Otherwise < they would have been refuted > long ago even by women 
and kids—never mind the more mature, who understand all the exact 
terms of godliness and right faith, but even by anyone with any partial 
glimmer of understanding of the truth—and, since they were refuted by 
the ancients, they would have been harried as blasphemers of the Master, 
as second killers of the Lord and despisers of the divine protection of our 
Lord Jesus Christ. (3) But by the emperor’s patronage, that is, his protec¬ 
tion of them, < they are in the ascendent >, so as to put into effect all the 
wrongs that have been and are still being done by them at Alexandria, 
Nicomedia, Mesopotamia and Palestine, under the patronage of the same, 
current emperor. 
,1 All the rest of their teachings are contrived from this verse in 
Proverbs, “The Lord created me the beginning of his ways, for his works.” 15 
And < they gather > every possible agreement and equivalent to this text 
< from the scriptures >, and everything that could be in accord with it, 
although neither the text itself nor the other passages say anything of the 
sort about the divinity of the Son of God. (2) All the same, anything like 
this—the text in the Apostle, “Receive ye the high priest of your profes¬ 
sion, who is faithful to him that made him”; 16 and < the one > in John’s 
Gospel, “He it is of whom I said unto you that he that cometh after me 
hath come into being 17 before me”; 18 and the one in Acts, “Be it be known 
unto all you house of Israel that God hath made this Jesus whom ye cruci¬ 
fied both Lord and Christ,” 19 and others like these—wherever < they find 
some text* > of note < they collect it* > as a defense against their foes. 
(3) For they are indeed foes and conspirators. “Let God arise and let his 
foes be scattered” 20 might well have been written of them and their kind. 
They appear to be members of our household—there is nothing worse 
than foes of one’s own household, for “A man’s foes are all the men of his 
household.” 21 And this too probably applies to them. 

,1 For they leap up like savage dogs to repel their foes and say, “What 
do you say of the Son of God?” (For these are their devices for introducing 
their poison to the simple.) 

“And what more can there be after this, after one calls him the Son of 
God, you folks who are ‘wise in your own eyes and prudent in their sight,’ 22 
and give the appearance of knowledgeability? What more can one add to 
the name of Jesus, other than to say that he is true Son, of the Father and 
not different from him?” 

,2 Then they scornfully jump right up and say, “How can he be ‘of 
God?’ ” And if you ask them, “Isn’t he the Son?” they confess the sonship 
in name but deny it in force and meaning and simply want to call him 
a bastard, not a real son. “For if he is of God,” they say, “and if God as 
it were begot < a Son > from himself, from his actual substance or his 

own essence—well then, he swelled, or was cut, or was expanded or con¬ 
tracted in begetting him, or underwent some physical suffering.” 23 

And they are simply ridiculous to compare their own characteristics 
with God’s, and draw a parallel between God and themselves. 24 (4) There 
can be nothing of the kind in God. “God is spirit” 25 and has begotten the 
Only-begotten of himself ineffably, inconceivably and spotlessly. 

15,5 “If he is of his essence then,” they say, “why doesn’t he know the 
day and the hour, as he says, ‘But of that day or that hour knoweth no man, 
neither the angels, neither the Son, but the Father only?’ 26 And if he is ‘of 
the Father,’ how could he become flesh?’ How could that nature which 
cannot be contained put on flesh, if by nature he were of the Father?” 

,1 And they do not know how they are gathering these calculations 
together to their own shame. For if he took flesh, and suffered and was 
crucified in it because he was different from the Father’s essence, they 
should tell us which other spiritual beings donned flesh even though they 
were creatures. For they cannot help admitting that the Son is superior 
to all. Even if they call him a creature, they admit that he is superior to 
all his creatures. 

,2 Indeed, they want to flatter him as though they were doing him 
a favor—as though they were striking him with one hand but anoint¬ 
ing him with the other. For they wish to make this concession to him as 
though by their own choice, and say, “We call him a creature, but not like 
any other creature; a product of creation, but not like any other product; 
and an offspring, but not like any other offspring.” 27 This to deprive him 
of the begetting which by nature is proper to him by saying, “not like any 
other offspring,” and declare him a true creature by saying, “not like any 
other creature.” 

,3 Whatever a creature may be, it is a creature. Even though its name 
is any number of times more exalted it is just the same as all creatures. 28 
The sun cannot not be a creature just like a rock even though it is brighter 
than the rest. Nor, because the moon outshines the stars, is it for this rea¬ 
son not one of the creatures. “Behold, all things are thy servants.” 29 
16,4 But the Only-begotten is truth and his word is true, as he said, “If 
ye continue in my word ye are truly my disciples, and ye shall know the 
truth, and the truth shall make you free.” 30 But if his word is truth and 
frees the souls whom he sets free, how much more is he himself free— 
since he is truth, and sets his believing servants free! For all things are his 
servants, and his Father’s, and the Holy Spirit’s. 

17,1 Then again they say, “How could he come in the flesh, if he was 
of the Father’s essence?” [Is it not true that] angels, who are his servants, 
have not taken flesh? Archangels? Hosts? All the other spiritual beings? 
(2) But they say too that the Spirit is even more inferior, and is the crea¬ 
ture of a creature, since he is < the product > of the Word. Why did the 
Spirit not take flesh then, since, on Arius’ premises, he can have a face 
more changeable than the Son’s? But since the Son was the Father’s wis¬ 
dom he consented, by his own perfection, to assume our weakness, so that 
all salvation would come to the world through him. (3) But people who 
turn good things to bad are ungrateful—ungrateful, unwise, insulters and 
blasphemers of their own Master. 

And whatever else they say, in the last analysis they mean it as a detrac¬ 
tion of him. "If he was of the Father’s essence, why was he hungry? Scrip¬ 
ture says too that God ‘shall not hunger or thirst, nor is there any finding 
out of his counsel.’ 31 But Christ was hungry and thirsty. Why did he tire 
from his journey and sit down, < when scripture says > that God ‘shall not 
weary? 32 (4) And why did he say, “The Father that hath sent me is greater 
than I?’ 33 The sender is one person, the sent, another.” 

And it is plain that the Father is not the Son, and the Son is not the 
Father. We do not talk like Sabellius, who says that he is the Son-Father. 
(5) If he had not said, “Another is he that hath sent me,” 34 and, “I go unto 
my God and your God, unto my Father and your Father,” 35 < the disciples 
would have believed that he himself was the Father. < This is why* > he 
said, < “My God.” But he said, “your God,” because* > his disciples were 
begotten < only by grace* >, and not by nature from the essence of God. 
< This is why > he said, “your Father,” to them. 
17,6 But people who say such things are just cracked. If he is called the 
Son in name only and is not the Son by nature, he is no different from all 
the other creatures even if he is of superior rank. Because the emperor 
outranks his governors and generals, this does not mean that he does not 
have the same limitations as the rest, and is not their fellow servant of the 
same creation, since he is mortal, just as his subjects are. (7) And because 
the sun surpasses the other stars, and the moon does to an extent, this 
does not mean that they are not heavenly bodies subordinate [to God], 
and subject to the ordinance of the one creator and maker, the Father, 
Son and Holy Spirit. (8) And because angels surpass the visible creatures 
and, in comparison with the rest, are the greatest of all—for they were 
created invisible, enjoy the supreme privilege of serving God with con¬ 
tinual hymns, are immortal by grace though not by nature, and yet have 
been vouchsafed a natural immortality by him who in himself is life and 
immortality—[all] this does not mean that they do not serve with fear 
and trembling, accountable and answerable to the holy Godhead, and 
subject to his bidding and command. 

18,1 This will help us < understand* > the exact nature of the truth we 
are after: to say, “Son,” but say it without considering him a son in name 
only, but say that the Son is a son by nature. With us too, many are called 
sons without being sons by nature. But our real sons are called “true”; they 
were actually begotten by us. (2) And if he was only called a son, as indeed 
all have been called sons of God, he is no different from the rest. And why 
is he worshiped as God? On Arius’ premises all the other things that have 
been given the title of sons should be worshiped, since they are termed 
sons of God. (3) But this is not the truth. The truth at all times knows 
one only-begotten Son of God whom all things serve and worship, and to 
whom “every knee shall bow, of things in heaven and things in earth and 
things under the earth, and every tongue shall confess that Jesus Christ is 
Lord to the glory of God the Father.” 36 

18,4 But neither is the Holy Spirit equivalent to the other spirits since 
the Spirit of God is one, a Spirit that proceeds from the Father and receives 
of the Son. Arians, though, make him a creature of a creature. For they say, 
“ ‘All things were made by him, and without him was not anything made 
that was made.’ 37 (5) Therefore,” they say, “the Holy Spirit is a creature 
too, since ‘alt things were made by him.’ ” 
And those who have lost their own souls for no good reason do not know 
that created beings are one thing, and that < un >created beings—Father, 
Son and Fioly Spirit, one God, Trinity in truth and Unity in oneness—are 
another. (6) This is the reason that God is one: there are not two Fathers, 
or two Sons or two Fioly Spirits, and the Son is not different from the 
Father but begotten of him, and the Holy Spirit is not different. But the 
Son is only-begotten, without beginning < and > not in time. And the Holy 
Spirit, as the Father himself and the Only-begotten know, is neither begot¬ 
ten nor created, nor alien to the Father and Son; “he anointed Christ with 
the Holy Spirit.” 38 If the Only-begotten is himself anointed with the Spirit, 
who can bring a charge against the Holy Trinity? 

rg,i Then again the insane Arius says, “Why did the Lord say, Why 
callest thou me good? One is good, God’ ” 39 as though himself denying his 
own goodness?” (2) Because they are soulish and fleshly, are discerned 
by the Holy Spirit and devoid of him, and lack the gift of the Holy Spirit 
which gives wisdom to all, they do not know God’s power and goodness, 
or the dispensation of God’s wisdom. 

19,3 “Again,” says Arius, “the sons of Zebedee asked him through their 
mother if one of them might sit at his right and one at his left in his king¬ 
dom, and he told them, ‘Ye know not what ye ask. Are ye able to drink 
the cup that I shall drink of? And when they said, Yea, he said unto them, 
Ye shall drink of my cup, but to sit on my right hand and on my left is 
not mine to give, but is for them for whom it is prepared of the Father.’ 40 
(4) Then the apostle says, ‘God raised him from the dead, 41 as though he 
needed someone to raise him. And it says in the Gospel according to Luke, 
‘There appeared an angel of the Lord strengthening him when he was in 
agony, and he sweat; and his sweat was as it were drops of blood,’ when 
he went out to pray before his betrayal. 42 (5) And again, on the cross he 
said, ‘Eli, Eli, lema sabachthani, that is, My God, my God, why hast thou 
forsaken me.’ 43 And do you see,” says Arius, “how he is in need of help?” 

rg,6 But as to his words, “I am in the Father and the Father in me,” 44 
< they cite >, “We two are one, that they also may be one,” 45 “And do 

you see,” he says, “that we too shall be one as the Father and the Son are 
one."* > Thus he is not speaking of a oneness by nature, but of a oneness 
of concord.” 

19,7 But not only this; they also deny that he has received a human 
soul, and do so deliberately. 46 For they confess that he has true flesh from 
Mary, and everything human except for a soul. Thus, when you hear of his 
hunger, thirst, weariness, journeying, sweat, sleep or anger, and say that he 
needed these because of his human nature, they will tell you afterwards 
that flesh does not do these things of itself unless it has a soul. (8) And in 
fact, this is true. “What can this mean,” they say, “except that his ‘divine 
nature’ had needs?”—so that, when they say that his “divine nature” had 
needs, they can declare that he is alien to and different from his Father’s 
true essence and nature. 

19,9 I believe, however, that from one, two, or five of their poorly cho¬ 
sen, refuted and exploded proof texts < I can make the whole of their vil¬ 
lainy plain* > to everyone 47 who has understanding. And since the whole 
truth is proclaimed, and plainly confirmed, in the faith of orthodoxy, 
< 1 trust that* > even if they cite a million other texts besides these con¬ 
trived expositions, the Arians will stand convicted in the eyes of those 
people who have godly good sense. For since they mean the same, most 
of these will be refuted in [the refutation of] these few. 

20,1 And I shall start my argument first with the place where Arius 
began the evil planting of their bitter root, the words of Solomon, The 
Lord created me the beginning of his ways, for his works.” 48 (2) And scrip¬ 
ture nowhere confirmed, nor did any apostle ever mention this text to 
apply it to the name of Christ. Thus Solomon is not speaking of the Son of 
God at all, even if he says, “I, wisdom, have given counsel and knowledge 
a home, and 1 have summoned judgment” 49 (3) How many “wisdoms” are 
loosely called God’s? But there is one Only-begotten, and he is not given 
that name catachrestically, but in truth. 

For all things are God’s wisdom, and whatever is from God is wisdom. 
(4) But the unique, supreme Wisdom is something else—that is, the Only- 
begotten, He who is called wisdom, not loosely but in truth, He who is 
always with the Father, “the power of God and the wisdom of God.” 50 But 
“The poor man’s wisdom is despised”; 51 and, “since in the wisdom of God 
the world knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of the Gospel 
to save them that believe”; 52 and, “God hath made foolish the wisdom of 
this world”; 53 And, “God gave to Solomon an heart like the sand of the sea, 
and made him wiser than the sons of Ana”; 54 and, “God gave wisdom to 
Bezaleel, and God filled Uri with wisdom.” 55 

20,5 And there is a great deal to say about wisdom, and “Where is the 
place of understanding, and where can wisdom be found?” 56 Even though 
the renowned wisdom says, “I, wisdom, have given counsel and knowl¬ 
edge a home, and I have summoned judgment. By me kings reign, and 
through me princes are great, rulers write righteousness, and despots pos¬ 
sess the earth. (6) I love them that love me, and they that seek me shall 
find me. Wealth and glory are mine, and the possession of many goods, 
and righteousness. I walk in the way of righteousness, and I tread in the 
midst of right paths, to apportion substance to them that love me, and 
fill their treasures with goods. (7) If I tell you the incidents of each day, 
I shall remember to recount the happenings from everlasting. The Lord 
created me the beginning of his ways, for his works. Before the age he 
established me in the beginning, before he made the earth and before he 
made the deeps, before fountains of water came forth, before mountains 
were founded and before all hills he begat me,” 57 and so on—(8) [even 
so], since there are some who want to dispute the passage, our opponents 
will obviously reply by citing the term, “wisdom,” and the sequel to it, The 
Lord created me,” together with, “I, wisdom, have given counsel a home.” 
“See here,” < they will say >, “wisdom gave her own name at the outset 
and, as she went on in order, indicated herself when she said, The Lord 
created me.’ (9) See, she says, ‘I, wisdom,’ above; and below she says, ‘If 
I tell you the happenings of each day, I shall remember to recount the 
things from everlasting.’ And what does she mean [by the ‘happenings 
from everlasting’]? The Lord created me the beginning of his ways.’ ” 
21,1 I have said that many things which < are > loosely < termed > 
wisdoms have been given by God from time to time, since God does all 
things with wisdom. But there is one true wisdom of the Father, the sub- 
sistent divine Word. For the word [“wisdom”] itself (i.e., at Prov. 8:22) by 
no means compels me to speak of the Son of God; < scripture > did not 
make that clear, nor did any of the apostles mention it, and not the Gospel 
either. (2) But if it were taken of the Son of God—the word [in itself] is 
not the same [as “Son”], and does not lend itself to an immediate judg¬ 
ment [as to whether it means “Son” at this point]. 

For the book is entirely proverbs. And nothing in a proverb has the 
same meaning [that it usually does]; it is described verbally in one way, 
but intended allegorically with another meaning. (3) If Solomon says this, 
however, and some venture to apply it to the Son of God—never! The 
word is not a reference to his Godhead. (4) But if it can be applied to 
Christ’s human nature—for “Wisdom hath builded her house” 58 —and if it 
can therefore be piously spoken in the person of Christ’s human nature, 59 
as though his human nature were saying, “The Lord created me” of his 
Godhead—(that is, “the Lord built me in Mary’s womb”)—“as the begin¬ 
ning of his ways for his works,” [then wisdom might indeed mean “Son” 
here.] 60 (5) For the beginning of the “ways” of Christ’s descent into the 
world is the body he took from Mary in his “work” of righteousness and 
salvation. 

But some crackbrain who is struck with this frightful plague and has 
enmity for the Son of God in his heart will be sure to rush forward and 
say, (6) “He said, ‘If I tell you the incidents of each day, I shall remember 
to recount the happenings from everlasting.’ 61 And you see that he says, 
‘from everlasting.’ But according to Matthew God’s incarnation came after 
seventy-two generations; how can ‘from everlasting’ be said by the human 
nature?” (22,1) And those who have strayed entirely off the road of the 
truth do not realize that whatever the sacred scripture wishes to teach, 
< if > it is beginning an exposition it does not go straight to the oldest data 
and, as it were, the main point, but begins with the events nearest at hand 
in order to show last of all what came first. (2) For this is why it said, “If I 
tell you the incidents of each day,” [first], but afterwards,” I < shall > also 
recount the things from everlasting.” 62 So God showed Moses the burning 
bush first, and the vision in the first instance was that of a bush on fire. 
And an angel spoke to him immediately, but later the Lord spoke to him 
from the bush. 

22,3 But Moses did not ask him straight off about what he had seen, 
but inquired about things in the distant past. For God said, “Come, I send 
thee to the children of Israel, and thou shalt say unto them, The God of 
your fathers hath sent me, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac and the 
God of Jacob,” 63 —naming Abraham and the others, five or six genera¬ 
tions before Moses. And since he had said “the God of your fathers” he 
had declared something ancient to him. (4) But Moses, with God-given 
understanding, was not asking about this but about something even more 
ancient: “If I go unto them and they say to me, What is his name? what 
shall I say unto them?” 64 and then he revealed his name: “I am He Who 
Is.” 65 (5) And he had begun first with the things nearest in time, but last 
of all revealed what was furthest in the past. 

Luke too begins with things that are later and nearest in time, “And Jesus 
began to be about thirty years of age, being, as was supposed, the son of 
Joseph, the son of Eli, the son of Matthan, the son of Nathan, the son 
of David, the son of Judah, the son of Jacob, the son of Abraham, the 
son of Nahor, the son of Noah, the son of Lamech, the son of Enoch, 
the son of Seth, the son of Adam, the son of God.” 66 And you see how he 
spoke of the incarnation first, and then the [things he says] last. 

22,6 And so when Matthew, in the fleshly genealogy, wished to remind 
people of Christ’s human nature, he did not say at once, “The birth ofjesus 
Christ the son of Abraham.” He said “son of David” first and then “son 
of Abraham,” indicating the sight most lately seen and the most recent 
happening and [then] one still further in the past, to show the indispens- 
ability of what is still higher above all creation. 

23,1 And so, when the blessed John came and found people preoccu¬ 
pied with Christ’s human nature on earth, with the Ebionites gone wrong 
because of < Mathew’s > tracing of Christ’s earthly genealogy from Abra¬ 
ham and Luke’s carrying of it back to Adam—and the Cerinthians and 
Merinthians, saying that he was conceived sexually as a mere man, and 
the Nazoraeans and many other sects,—(2) John, as though coming along 
behind them (he was the fourth evangelist) began to recall them from 
their wandering, as it were, and their preoccupation with Christ’s coming 
below. As though following behind and seeing that some were pointed 
towards rough, steep paths and had left the straight, true road, he began, 
as it were, to say to them, “Where are you headed? Where are you going, 
you who are taking that rough road full of obstacles and leading to a pit? 
(3) That isn’t so! Turn back! The divine Word begotten of the Father on 
high does not date only from Mary. He is not from the time of Joseph 
her betrothed. He is not from the time of Shealtiel, Zerubbabel, David, 
Abraham, Jacob, Noah and Adam. ‘In the beginning was the Word, and the 
Word was with God, and the Word was God.’ ” 67 

23,4 The word, “was,” followed by “was” and followed by another “was,” 
admits of no “was not.” And you see, first of all, how scripture gave the most 
recent events at once—how Matthew showed the way with the genealogy 
and still did not give < all > the precise facts himself, though he surely car¬ 
ried the genealogy into the past. And Mark < described > the events in the 
world, a voice crying in the wilderness, < and > the Lord who was foretold 
by the Prophets and Law. And Luke traced him from the most recent times 
back to the earliest, < But later John, coming fourth, made the crowning 
touch manifest, and the perfection of the order on high and the eternal 
Godhead. (5) In the same way Solomon in his proverb < first indicated* > 
the beginning of the ways—(if, indeed, some may wish to say with piety 
that, since his Godhead itself had made the flesh and human nature as 
“the beginning of his ways for his works” 68 of men’s salvation and his own 
goodness)—his incarnate self, since it says itself of Christ’s Godhead, “The 
Godhead itself founded the house,” 69 and immediately afterwards, as the 
topic develops, says, “He founded me in the beginning.” 

23,6 Was the Son of God really created, and later established, in his 
divine nature? The clever folks, the observers of heaven, had better tell me 
the art by which wisdom was created, the tool with which it was estab¬ 
lished. But if it is allowable even to conceive of it, let us flee from such 
profound blasphemy, to keep our hands off the divine nature of the Only- 
begotten, which is always with the Father and has been begotten of him. 
(7) For < the > Lord was the Word, always with the Father, always wisdom, 
always God of God, true and not spurious light, always deriving his being 
from the Father, and always truth and life. 

24,1 And why should I say so much about this? He then says, “He 
established me in the beginning.” 70 The godly can therefore see that 
here he means the human soul. (2) For the incarnate human nature says, 
“The Lord created me,” 71 —if, indeed, it should be taken in this way. “He 
established,” 72 however, should be taken in the sense that he was estab¬ 
lished in the soul. But “Before all hills he begot me,” 73 is meant to show 
that his begetting is from on high. 

And I have said these things, by no means to insist on them, but as a 
devout way of understanding the passage as a reference to the human 
nature. (3) Even though I must speak in this way, no one can ever make 
me say that this passage refers to Christ. But it if is to be said of Christ, 
there indeed is its meaning, not obtained by guesswork but in accord with 
the piety of the thought, so as not to attribute any deficiency to the Son 
< or > suppose that he has a Godhead which is inferior to the Father’s 
essence. (4) For some of our fathers, and orthodox, 74 —if indeed we must 
speak in this way of “The Lord created me and established me” 75 —have 
interpreted this by taking it of the human nature. And < because > this 
is a pious thought many important fathers have taught it. (5) And if one 
should not wish to accept the teaching of the orthodox [on this point], he 
will not be compelled to and it will do no harm to those who are strangers 
to the faith and pagans. 

For neither will < the fact that Christ suffered* > for us entail any defi¬ 
ciency in < the Son >; his Godhead is free [from suffering] and is always 
with the Father. (6) Christ suffered whatever he suffered, but was not 
changed in nature; his Godhead retained its impassibility. Thus, when he 
willed of his own good pleasure to suffer for humanity—since the God¬ 
head, which is impassible in itself, cannot suffer—he took our passible 
body since he is Wisdom, consented to suffering in it and taking our suf¬ 
ferings upon him in the flesh, accompanied by the Godhead. 
For the Godhead does not suffer. (7) Flow can the One who said, “I am 
the life,” 76 die? God remains impassible but shares the sufferings of the 
flesh so that, even though Godhead does not suffer, the suffering may be 
counted as the Godhead’s and our salvation may be in God. The suffering 
is in the flesh that we may have, not a passible but an impassible God who 
counts the suffering as his own, not of necessity but by his own choice. 

25,1 But anyway, neither have these people examined the Hebrew 
expressions, or found out or < understood > what they mean, and yet 
they have willfully and rashly risen up as deadly foes, looking for a chance 
to mutilate the faith—or themselves, rather, for they can’t mutilate the 
truth. And since they have found “The Lord created me,” they recklessly 
dream as though they were having hallucinations, bringing mankind 
things that are of no use, and disturbing the world. (2) This is not what 
the Hebrew means, and so Aquila says, “The Lord got me.” Men who have 
sired children always say, “I have gotten a son.” 

But neither did Aquila render the meaning. “I have gotten a son” implies 
something new, but in God there can be nothing new. (3) Even if one con¬ 
fesses that the Son has been begotten of the Father and not created, he 
was begotten without time and without beginning. (4) For there can be no 
time between the Father and the Son, or there will be some time < previ¬ 
ous > to the Son’s. For if all things are made through him, so are the times. 
(5) But if there is a time before Him who is before all—how can there be? 
But if there is, then we shall need another Son, through whom the time 
before the Son has been made. 

And there are many things which lead into endless perplexity the 
minds of those people who “are always busy but do nothing good.” 77 (6) In 
the Hebrew it says, “Adonai” (which means, “the Lord”) “kanani,” which 
can be rendered both “hatched 78 me” and “got me.” In the strictest sense, 
however, it means, “hatched me.” And which hatchling is not begotten 
from the substance of its begetter? And here, among bodily creatures, the 
young are produced by the pairings of male and female—from men to 
cattle, birds and all the rest. (7) And so, since the Only-begotten was in all 
respects the Father’s wisdom and willed to do all things for our correction, 
so that no one would form a false notion of him and be deprived of the 
truth, he was not conceived from a man’s seed when he made his home 
in the human race, when he was truly born of a woman and lay in the 
Virgin’s womb during the period of gestation. Otherwise his birth in the 
flesh might have required pairing and sexual congress. But he took flesh 
only from his mother and yet made his human nature complete in his 
own image—not deficient, but true human nature. 

25,8 And his not being of a man’s seed did not make him deficient. He 
to whom all things belong took all things in their perfection: flesh, sinews, 
veins and everything else; a soul, truly and not in appearance; a mind; and 
all other human characteristics except for sin, as scripture says, “He was 
in all points tempted as a man, apart from sin.” 79 (g) Thus, by being born 
in the flesh here simply of a mother, perfectly man and without defect, 
he would show those who desire to see the truth and not blind their own 
minds that on high he has been perfectly begotten of a Father on high, 
without beginning and not in time; and below has been born of a mother 
only, without spot or defilement. 

26,1 But to explain the phrase, “Adonai kanani,” which means, “The Lord 
hatched me.” Whatever begets, begets its like. A man begets a man and 
God begets God, the man physically and God spiritually. (2) And as is the 
man who begets, so is the man who is begotten of him. The human beget¬ 
ter, who is subject to suffering, < begets > his own son, and the impassible 
God begot the Son who was begotten of him without suffering—begot 
him truly and not in appearance, of himself and not from outside himself, 
impassible spirit impassibly begetting spirit, impassible God impassibly 
begetting very God. 

26,3 For if he created all things himself—and you admit, Arius, that 
God has created all things—then he also begot the Son himself. (4) But if 
you say, “If he begot, he suffered in begetting,” we will say to you that if 
he suffered in begetting he tired from creating. But all that he wills, he has 
simultaneously perfected in himself; the Godhead will not bring suffering 
on the Son in the process of creation; nor can the Godhead be conceived 
of as suffering because of its spotless begetting of the Son. For the Father 
is unchangeable, the Son is unchangeable, the Holy Spirit is unchange¬ 
able, one essence, one Godhead. 

26,5 But you are sure to ask me, “Did God beget the Son by willing to 
or without willing to?” And I am not like you, you troublemaker, to think 
any such thing of God. “If he begot him without willing to, he begot him 
unwillingly. And if he begot him willingly, the will came before the Son, 
and because of the will there will be at least a moment of time between 
the Son [and the Father].” (6) But in God there is no time to will and no 
will to think. God begot the Son neither by willing to nor without willing 
to, but begot him in his nature which transcends will. For his is the nature 
of Godhead, which neither needs a will nor does anything without a will, 
but of itself possesses all things at once and is in want of nothing. 

27,1 But Arius ferrets out still more texts, always wandering over every¬ 
thing and fussing with unsound arguments—not as the sacred text is, but 
as he < conceives of it > in his unhealthy preoccupation with controversies 
and verbal disputes which are good for nothing except his own ruin and 
his dupes’. < And > he seizes on the text where the Lord blessed his dis¬ 
ciples and said, “Father, grant them to have life in themselves. And this 
is life eternal, that they know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ 
whom thou hast sent.” 80 (2) But I have already dealt with all this in my 
long work on the faith which, in my mediocrity and feebleness, I have been 
compelled to write about faith at the urgent request of the brethren, and 
have called the Ancoratus . 81 (3) And as, with God’s help, my poor mind 
was able to gather the truths of God’s teaching from every scripture—like 
an anchor for those who wish < to hold onto > the holy apostolic and pro¬ 
phetic faith of our fathers which has been preached in God’s holy church 
from the beginning until now—I have set it out clearly for our minds to 
grasp and be certain of, < so that > they will not be shaken by the devil’s 
devices or damaged by the seas which, by the sects with their bluster, 
have been raised in the world. 

27,4 For the Lord taught his own disciples, “If what ye have heard from 
the beginning abide in you, and what ye have heard < of me > 82 abide in 
you, ye shall abide in me and I in you, and I in the Father and ye in me.” 83 
(5) Thus the truths of the faith, which we have heard from the Lord since 
the beginning, abide in God’s holy church, (6) and God’s holy church and 
orthodox faith thus abide in the Lord; and the Lord, the Only-begotten, 
abides in the Father, and the Father in the Son, and we in him through the 
Holy Spirit, provided we become temples to hold his Holy Spirit. (7) As 
God’s holy apostle said, “Ye are the temple of God, and the Spirit of God 
dwelleth in you.” 84 Thus the Spirit is God of God; and through God’s Holy 
Spirit we are called temples, if we give his Spirit a home within us. For, 
< the > Spirit is the Spirit of Christ who proceeds < from > the Father and 
receives of the Son, as the Only-begotten himself confesses. 

28,1 I have discussed all this in that book of mine about faith—the 
book which, as I said, I wrote to Pamphylia and Pisidia. 85 But here, since 
I have come to the debated expressions one after another, I have had dili¬ 
gently to make the same points over again, as it were, because of Arius, 
the heresiarch with whom we are dealing, and the Arians who derive 
from him—to demolish their wicked arguments which turn “sweet to bit¬ 
ter, good to evil, and light to darkness.” 86 (2) For through the holy Isaiah 
“Woe” is definitively pronounced by the Lord upon such people, who turn 
good to evil. And God is in no way responsible for their kind. From pride, 
prejudice, would-be wisdom or devilish conceit, each of them has been 
deprived of the truth and, with his unsound teaching, brought an afflic¬ 
tion on the world. 

28,3 All right, let’s take up this text in order to understand the words 
the Lord has spoken, as the holy apostle says, “We also have the Spirit 
of God, that we may know the things that God hath bestowed upon us, 
which things we likewise speak.” 87 (4) For the Lord says, “Grant them to 
have life in themselves. And this is life eternal, that they may know thee, 
the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent.” 88 

2g,i Now this trouble-maker, Arius, and his followers jump up and say, 
“His praying to God at all, and saying, ‘Father, grant them to have life in 
themselves,’ shows that he is not the equal of the Giver of the life. If he 
were of the Father’s essence he would give the life himself, and not ask 
the Father to give it to those who receive the gifts he gives in answer to 
their requests.” 

2g,2 And the people who have turned their minds against themselves 
do not realize that the Only-begotten came to be our example and salva¬ 
tion in every way, and took his stand in the world like an athlete in an 
arena, to destroy all that rebels against the truth—sometimes by idolatry, 
sometimes by Jewish conceit, sometimes from unbelief, sometimes from 
the vanity of human prejudice—came to teach men humility, so that no 
human being will think himself important, but will ascribe everything to 
the Father of all. (3) And so, although he is life—as he says, “I am the 
life” 89 —and although he has the power to give life, he has no wish to 
confuse what is right. < As > he has come for one sovereignty, one God¬ 
head, one truth, one concord, one Glory, to secure men’s salvation and 
understanding, he also asks of the Father before his disciples. (4) For 
which son does not ask his father? And which father does not give to his 
son? But what kind of son is different from the nature of his father? And 
thus < the > Son, “the only-begotten of a Father, full of grace and truth,” 90 
needed no filling, < since he was > not in want of truth but full of grace 
and truth. (5) And he who is full both gives and can give; but his will is to 
refer all things to the Father. 

For the Son glorifies the Father and the Father glorifies the Only- 
begotten. “I have glorified thee on the earth,” 91 said the Son to the Father, 
and the Father said to the Son, “I have both glorified thee, and will glorify 
thee again.” 92 (6) The Godhead can have no dispute, no envy: “Grant them 
to have life in themselves.” 93 He who is life, wills to receive life from the 
Father and give it to his disciples although he himself is life, so as not to 
divide the Divine Unity and thus not put an obstacle in the way of the 
Jews—so that the Jews would hear him asking of the Father. 

30,1 How does the Son ask the Father, then? As though not having and 
so asking? No, but by declaring the oneness of the Trinity, which provides 
the gifts perfectly to one who receives them worthily. But to show the 
Godhead’s oneness, in another passage he gives [gifts], no longer by ask¬ 
ing for them but by giving his own on his own authority, for he is Well- 
spring of Wellspring, 94 and God of God; < for > “He breathed in their faces 
and said, ‘Receive ye the Holy Spirit.’ ” 95 (2) And in another passage “He 
lifted up his hands and said,” “Receive ye the Holy Spirit.” 96 

And he has life in himself, to give to whomever he will. “For as the 
Father hath life in himself, so hath the Son life in himself.” 97 (3) And you 
see that [it is] from honor of the Father and for the sake of one unity and 
one glory, and so that the disciples will not suppose that the Only-begotten 
has come to divert the believers’ minds from the God of the Law and the 
prophets—(4 )[it is] for this reason that, being God and foreknowing of 
the malice of men, he addresses these words as to the Father and gives 
the Father the glory that cannot be taken away. And so Mani will be con¬ 
founded, who denies the Father; the disciples will learn that the Godhead 
is the same in the Old and the New Testaments; the Jews will be put to 
shame because the Only-begotten did not come to teach another God but 
to reveal his Godhead and that of his heavenly Father. (5) “Grant them to 
have life in themselves,” [he says], although he himself was proclaiming 
this life. Why, then, would he ask the Father to give them what he himself 
was teaching and giving? For he made the life known later on by saying, 
“This is life, that they may know thee, the only true God.” 98 

,1 Next, because Christ said, “the only true God,” 99 Arius and his fol¬ 
lowers jump at the verse as though they have found an argument against 
the truth. “He said, ‘The only true God.’ You see, then, that only the Father 
is true.” 

,2 But let’s ask you Arians ourselves, “What do you mean? Is only the 
Father true? But what is the Son? Isn’t the Son true? If the Son isn’t ‘true,’ 
‘Our faith is vain and our preaching is in vain.’ 100 (3) And in blasphemy 
against your own selves you will be found to be likening the Son of < God > 
to the unspeakable, infamous idols—you to whom the prophets said, as 
though to persons who are suffering a delusion, < ‘Solomon says, The wor¬ 
ship of the unspeakable idols is the beginning of all evil.'* > 101 And each of 
the prophets recalled this text, < like Jeremiah* > who said, < Woe unto 
them that follow after idols,’* > 102 and, ‘Our fathers made for themselves 
false gods, and their high places became false.’ 103 (4) The Only-begotten 
too is condemned in your eyes, and you thus hold a disgusting opinion of 
‘him who redeemed you’ 104 —if, indeed, he did redeem you. For since you 
deny your Savior who redeemed you, you cannot be of his fold.” 

For if God is not true, he should not be worshiped; and if he is created, 
he is not God. And if he is not to be worshiped, how can he be called God? 
Stop it, you who < are making a god* > of one more natural object, (5) who 
are conducting Babylonian < worship* >, who have set up Nebuchadnez- 
zar’s image and idol! You who are blowing this renowned trumpet to unite 
< the worshipers > 105 < against > the Son of God* >; who, with your wrong 
words, are bringing the peoples to disaster with music, cymbals and psal¬ 
tery, preparing them to serve an image rather than God and truth. And 
who else is as true as the Son of God? (6) “For who shall be likened to the 
Lord among the sons of God?” 106 says the scripture, and, “None other shall 
be reckoned in comparison with him.” 107 And what does he say [next]? 
To show you that he means the Son, he describes him next and says, “He 
hath found out every way of understanding, and given it < to Jacob his 
servant and Israel whom he loveth. > (7) And thereafter he appeared on 
earth and consorted with men.” 108 How can this not have been said truly 
of him? < And how can the Son not be true God* > when he says, “I am 
the truth?” 109 

32,1 But you will ask me, “Why did the only-begotten true God say, ‘that 
they may know thee, the only true God?” [I reply],“to discourage polythe¬ 
ism, to prevent division of the life-giving knowledge? 110 If the Father is 
the only true God, then the Son is true and truly begotten of the Father! 
(2) For it was ‘to honor the Father’ * * 111 and reveal him alone as ‘true God,’ 
that the Son made it known that he is ‘truly begotten of the Father.’ ” 

And how was this to be made known? (3) Just look at the texts here! It 
says here that the Father is the only “true God,” but in the Gospel accord¬ 
ing to John it says, “He was the true light. 112 And which “true light” was 
this but the Only-begotten? And again, the scriptures say of God, “God is 
light,” 113 and they didn’t say, “God is true light.” On the other hand, they 
said of God’s only-begotten Son that the Only-begotten is “true light.” 

32,4 It said, “true God,” of the Father, and not that God is “true light.” 
But of the Son, it said, “God,” and didn’t add “true” to “The Son is God.” 
And where it said, “God is light,” it didn’t add, “true light.” Then what 
should we say of the Father? We < shall confess* > that God is “true light,” 
and not make the Godhead defective. (5) And because “true light” is not 
[said of God] in the scripture, should we < also > sinfully say that God 
is not true light? And since scripture says that the Son is God, and that 
he was God with the true Father—(‘The Word was God’; 114 and it didn’t 
say that the Word became God, but that he was God)—the equivalence 
[of the Father and the Son] will be shown by the two phrases. From the 
Father’s being “true God” and the Son’s being “true light” the equality of 
their rank will be evident; and from the Son’s being “God” and the Father’s 
being “light” the equivalence of their glory will be made plain. (6) And 
there will be no difference, nor can anyone contradict the truth, but the 
Father is true God, and the Only-begotten is true God. 

,1 But I am obliged to speak further here, about the Holy Spirit, or, if 
I leave anything out, I may give the enemy, who want < to contradict >, a 
chance to hold their < wicked beliefs* >. For it is the same with the Holy 
Spirit, as the Lord himself testifies by saying “the Spirit of truth” and “the 
Spirit of the Father,” 115 but the apostle by saying “Spirit of Christ.” (2) Thus, 
being the Spirit of the Father [and] the Spirit of the Son, the Holy Spirit is 
the Spirit of truth, the Spirit of God, just as God is true God, just as he is 
true light. For there is one Trinity, one glory, one Godhead, one Lordship. 
(3) The Father is a father, the Son is a son, the Holy Spirit is a holy spirit. 
The Trinity is not an identity, not separate from its own unity, not wanting 
in perfection, not strange to its own identity, but is one Perfection, three 
Perfects, one Godhead. 

33,4 And the sword of the opposition has fallen [from its hand]. Indeed, 
scripture says, “< Their blows became a weapon > of babes.” 116 Even if 
infants want to take weapons they lack the strength, and cannot do any¬ 
thing with their hands. Even though infants are roused to anger they kill 
and do harm to themselves rather [than anyone else], since they cannot 
make an armed attack on others. Similarly these people have sent their 
imposture to war with themselves, but will bring no evil on the sons of 
the truth. 

,1 But once more I shall go on to other texts which they have thought 
of. To begin with, the falsehood they use in order to deceive the simple 
and innocent is amazing. As the serpent deceived Eve in her innocence, so 
they, if they wish to win their allegiance, first < approach* > those who do 
not wish to go by their creed with much flattery, and with liberal expen¬ 
diture, attention, and both promises and threats, such as “You’re opposing 
the imperial decrees and the wrath of the emperor Valens.” (2) And what 
do they say [next]? “Well, what is it that we’re saying? It’s the faith [itself], 
only you’re [too] proud [to admit it]!” 

All right, let’s see whether this is the faith. They say, “We confess that 
the Son is begotten of the Father, and do not deny it. (3) But,” they say, 
“we must also confess that he is a creature and a product of creation.” 

But nothing could be more pathetic. Nothing created is like anything 
begotten, and nothing begotten is like anything created, especially in the 
case of that one, pure and perfect essence. (4) 117 For all things have been 
created by God, but only God’s Son has been begotten, and only the Holy 
Spirit proceeded from the Father and received of the Son. All other things 
are created beings, and neither proceeded from the Father nor received 
of the Son, but received of the Son’s fullness, as the scripture says, “By the 
Word of God were all things established, and all the host of them by the 
Spirit of his mouth.” 118 

34,5 “But we must confess the creaturehood as well,” says Arius, “since 
scripture said ‘creature’ in a figurative sense, and ‘offspring’ is meant figu¬ 
ratively. For even if we say, ‘offspring,’ we shall not mean an offspring like 
any other.” 

Well then, they are deceiving the innocent by saying, “offspring,” and 
the offspring isn’t real. (6) “But we also confess Christ’s creaturehood,” 
they say. “For Christ is also called door, way, pillar, cloud, rock, lamb, 119 
lamb, 120 stream, calf, lion, well-spring, wisdom, Word, Son, angel, Christ, 
Savior, Lord, man, Son of Man, cornerstone, sun, prophet, bread, king, 
building, husbandman, shepherd, vine, and all sorts of things like these. 
In the same way,” they say, “we also use ‘creature’ in an accommodated 
sense of the word. For we are bound to confess it.” 

35,r Such wicked speculation, and such cunning! May the Lord allow 
no son of the truth to be brought by such dissimulation to accept “crea¬ 
ture” as the Son of God’s title for such reasons, and make that confession. 
Let them tell us what the use of this is, and we will grant them the conclu¬ 
sion of their reasonings. (2) For all those things are ways of speaking and 
do not impair the Son’s divinity, make him defective in comparison with 
the Father, or < alter him* > from his essential nature. Even if he should 
be called “door,” it is because we enter by him; if road, it is because we go 
by him; if "pillar,” because he is the support of the truth. Even if “cloud,” 
this is because he overshadowed the children of Israel, if “fire,” because of 
the brightness of the fire which gave them light in the wilderness. Even if 
he should be called “manna,” this is because they denied that he was the 
bread from heaven; if “bread,” because we are strengthened by him. 

,3 Even if “angel,” this is because he is an angel of a great counsel. 
The word, “angel,” is a synonym. Rahab received the “angels,” and yet the 
men who had been sent there were not angels, but the persons who brought 
the report 121 of the place. And so, because he reported the Father’s will 
to men, the Only-begotten is an “angel of a great counsel,” who reports 
the great counsel in the world. 

,4 Even if he should be called “stone,” the “stone” is not inanimate; 
this is a way of speaking, because he has become a stumbling block to 
the Jews, but a foundation of salvation to us. And he is called “corner¬ 
stone” because he unites the Old and the New Testaments, circumcision 
and uncircumcision, as one body. (5) But he is called “lamb” because of 
his harmlessness, and because the sin of humankind has been done away 
by his offering to the Father as a lamb for the slaughter; for the Impassible 
came to suffer for our salvation. And whatever else in these usages is an 
aid to human salvation is applied to him by the sacred scripture in some 
accommodated sense. 

36,1 Now what good can “creature” do, or what use is it to our salva¬ 
tion and to the glory and perfect divinity of the incarnate divine Word? 
How does calling him “creature” help us? What can a creature do for crea¬ 
tures? How does a creature benefit creatures? (2) Why did God create 
< a Son > and allow < him > to be worshiped as God, when he says, “Thou 
shalt not make to thyself any likeness, neither on earth nor in heaven, 
and thou shalt not worship it?” 122 Why did he create a Son for himself 
and order that he be worshiped, particularly when the apostle says, “And 
they served the creature rather than the creator, and were made fools.” 123 
It is foolish to treat a creature as God and break the first commandment, 
which says, “Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt 
thou serve.” 124 (3) And thus God’s holy church worships, not a creature 
but a begotten Son, the Father in the Son, and the Son in the Father, with 
the Holy Spirit. 
,4 “Oh, yes!” says Arius. “Unless I say he is a creature, I attribute dimi¬ 
nution to the Father. For the creature does not diminish the creator, but 
by the nature of things the begotten shrinks its begetter, or broadens or 
lessens or cuts it, or does it some such injury.” 125 

,5 It is most foolish of those who think such things to imagine God¬ 
head in their likeness—and of those who attribute their frailties to God, 
since God is wholly impassible, both in begetting and in creating. We are 
creatures, and as we suffer when we beget, we tire when we create. And if 
the Father suffers in begetting, then he also tires in creating. 

,6 But how can one speak of suffering in connection with God, and of 
his tiring if he creates? He does not tire, never think it! The scripture says, 
“He shall not weary.” 126 "God is spirit” 127 and begot the Son spiritual<ly>, 
without beginning and not in time, “God of God, light of light, very God 
of very God, begotten, not made.” 128 

37,1 But I shall pass this text by too, and once more devote my atten¬ 
tion to others which they repeat and bandy about in wrong senses, and 
which I have mentioned earlier. For again, they confusedly misinterpret 
this one: “Receive your high priest, who is faithful to him that made him.” 129 
(2) In the first place they reject this Epistle, I mean the Epistle to the 
Hebrews, remove it bodily from the Apostle and say that it is not his. But 
because of their malady they < turn > the text to their advantage, as I said, 
take it in a wrong sense, and covertly introduce the Son’s creaturehood, 
supposedly by means of the words, “faithful to him that made him.” 130 

37,3 But someone with sense might ask them when our Lord adopted 
the title of “high priest,” and they will be at a loss because they have no 
answer. (4) Christ never adopted these names before his incarnation— 
stone, sheep led to the slaughter, man and Son of Man, eagle, lamb and 
all the rest that are applied to him after his coming in the flesh. Thus he 
is called “high priest” because of the declaration the Law made of him, 
“A prophet shall the Lord raise unto you, of your brethren.” 131 (5) The text 
thus plainly explains “prophet,” “high priest,” and “of them” [as titles given] 
after his sojourn on earth, and it can be seen at a glance how, once again, 
God’s unconquerable power and foreknowledge foretold and certified all 
this by its wondrous light, to the “stopping of every mouth” 132 that rebels 
against the truth. (6) For he says in the same passage, “Every high priest 
taken from among men is ordained for men to offer gifts and sacrifices, 
being able to bear with [their infirmities]. For he hath need <to offer > 
for his own sins. But he that had no sin offered himself to the Father.” 133 
(7) And “of men” is said because of the earthly sojourn, but “not of men” 
< and > “that hath no sin” are said because of the divinity. And of his divin¬ 
ity he says, “though he were a son”; but of his humanity, “He learned by 
the things he suffered.” 134 

384 And you see that all of Christ’s titles are simple and have nothing 
complicated in them. “High priest faithful to him that made him" here 
describes neither the making of his body here nor of his human nature, 
nor is it speaking of creation at all, but of the bestowal of his rank after 
his incarnation, like the text, “He gave him a name which is above every 
name.” 135 (2) And this was not done of old in the divine nature, but < in > 
his current advent, since the human nature he took from Mary received 
the name above every name, the title “Son of God” in addition to the title 
of “Divine Word.” (3) And again, for this reason he has said here, through 
the apostle himself, “We see Jesus, who for a little was made lower than 
the angels crowned with glory and honor,” 136 so that the Master and Maker 
of the angels would appear lower than they; so that he who inspires the 
angels with dread and fear and, with the Father and the Holy Spirit, made 
the angels from nothing, would be called “lower,” and it would be plainly 
evident that he is not speaking of his Godhead here, but of his flesh. 

38,4 For the suffering of death was not counted as the Word’s before 
he took flesh, but after his incarnation, with the same Word being passible 
and impassible—impassible in Godhead but suffering in his manhood, 
just as both titles apply to the one [person]—“Son of Man” to the same 
person, and “Son of God” to the same. For Christ is called the “Son” in 
both alike. 

39,r What did God “make” him, then? From all that has been said the 
trouble-makers should learn that nothing in this text is relevant to the 
Godhead but to the human nature. And “made him,” does not refer to the 
making or creating of him, but to his rank after the advent. 

39,2 If someone asks a king about his son, and says, “What is he to 
you?” the king will tell him, “He is my son.” 

“Is he your legitimate or your illegitimate son?” The king will say, “He 
is my legitimate son.” 

“Then what did you make him?” 

“I made him king.” Plainly, the son’s rank is no different from his 
father’s. (3) And because he has said, “I made him king,” this surely does 
not mean that the king is saying, “I created him.” In saying, “I made him,” 
he has certainly not denied the begetting of him—which he had acknowl¬ 
edged—but has made that plain; “I made him,” however, was a statement 
of his rank. Thus, by those who wish < to obtain > salvation, the Son is 
unambiguously believed to be the Son of the Father, and is worshiped. 

39,4 But “was made high priest” is said because he offered himself in 
his body to the Father for mankind, himself the priest, himself the victim; 
as high priest for all creation he offered himself spiritually and gloriously 
in his body itself and “sat down at the Father’s right hand,” 137 after “being 
made an high priest forever” 138 and “passing through the heavens” 139 once 
and for all. The same holy apostle testifies to this of him in the lines that 
follow. (5) And once again their ostensible discussion of sacred scripture, 
which they use as their excuse, has proved a failure, for scripture is life- 
giving; nothing in it offers an obstacle to the faithful or makes for the 
downfall of blasphemy against the Word. 

40,1 Then they have mentioned another passage, when John was stand¬ 
ing in the wilderness, saw him coming and said, “This is he of whom I said 
unto you, a man cometh after me that was made 140 before me, for he was 
before me.” 141 (2) And first, as though they were half drowsy, they mis¬ 
understand the expressions themselves and say, “How could this apply 
to the human nature, when he was not conceived in Mary’s womb before 
the conception of John? Instead, as the evangelist says ‘In the sixth month 
the angel Gabriel was sent to a city of Galilee, to a virgin espoused to a 
man whose name was Joseph. And he came in unto her and said, Hail, 
thou that art highly favored, the Lord is with thee,’ 142 and the rest that 
follows. (3) When the virgin was troubled at his greeting he said to her, 
‘Behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb and bear a son, and shalt call 
his name Jesus. And behold, thy cousin Elizabeth hath conceived a son 
in her old age, and this is the sixth month with her that is called barren.’ 143 
And you see,” they say, “that John was already there six months before the 
annunciation to Mary. (4) How can ‘He was made 144 before me’ apply to 
Christ’s human nature?” 

Can any innocent soul whose mind is not clear and firmly made up, 
hear that without being upset? (5) For <truly>, 145 for those who bring their 
troubles on themselves, the sacred scriptures’ cogent, innocent, life-giving 
teachings appear to do more harm then [good] although the texts are 
always illumined in the Holy Spirit. (6) What has been omitted to make 
the text convincing? See here, it says “This”—to indicate something vis¬ 
ible and show it to the onlookers—“This is he of whom I said unto you 
that he corneth after me.” And who is coming but a “man?” But no one 
with sense would suppose that our Lord is a mere man—only the sects we 
have already indicated, the Cerinthians, Merinthians and Ebionites. 

40,7 But together with knowing him as “man” it is surely true that the 
true believers know him with certainty as Lord as John testifies, “That 
which we have heard from the beginning,” 146 meaning him who is from 
the beginning—the invisible divine Word, of whom we have heard in the 
sacred scriptures, who is proclaimed in the prophets, who is hymned in 
heaven. (8) Thus the intent of < the line >, “We have heard with our ears 
from the beginning and have seen with our eyes,” is for the word, “hear,” 
coming first, to confess that he is God from the beginning, but for the 
word “see” to show that he is the man of whom John the Baptist said, 
“After me corneth a man.” 147 And “our hands have handled” is meant to 
show that he is God from on high and indicate that he is visible man, 
born of Mary and raised whole from the dead without losing the sacred 
vessel and perfect human nature he had taken; it is meant instead, from 
the handling of his side and the nail-prints, to give unshakeable testimony 
to all three, (g) So please understand here too that “This is he of whom 
I said unto you that a man cometh after me” 148 is meant to show the 
human nature, and “He was before me” to show the Godhead “because he 
was before me.” For “He was in the world,” says the holy Gospel, “and the 
world was made by him, and the world knew him not.” 149 

,1 But if he was in the world before the creation and begetting ofjohn 
he had arrived in the world before him—not meaning creation or making, 
but in the sense in which people use the same word to say, “I arrived 150 in 
Jerusalem, arrived in Babylon, arrived in Ethiopia, arrived in Alexandria”— 
not meaning creation here, but presence and arrival. (2) What does “I 
arrived in Babylon” or some other place mean but, “I came [there]?” “He 
arrived [here] before me” shows the continual presence on earth of the 
Word, and “He was before me” shows that the Godhead is eternal. “Com¬ 
ing after me” does, however, indicate his conception after John’s. 

And so “I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness” 151 means a cry 
to draw people’s attention. (3) When people call they give a loud shout 
first without any words, to call from a distance to the people who need to 
hear something from them. And once the people hear the shout [which 
is] only [a shout], and pay attention and get ready to hear, then finally the 
shouter pronounces whatever words he wanted to say. (4) And thus John 
was a voice in the wilderness to draw people’s attention. For John himself 
was not the Word; the Word on whose account the preparatory shout was 
heard came after him. And this is why he says, “the voice of one crying in 
the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord.” 152 (5) The voice prepares 
the ways, but the Lord sets foot on the ways which have been prepared. 
And a voice speaks < to > the ear; but when the ear is receptive, the word 
is implanted in the ears of its receivers. Thus Arius and his followers will 
never perceive God’s truth although it enlightens the hearts of the faithful 
at all times to prevent their turning away from the salvation which is to be 
found in the Word, the true, uncreated and unoriginate Son of God. 

,1 But again, as I go ahead and come to each topic in turn, I shall 
not omit any point I have previously proposed for solution but take up 
the thread again. 153 Once more the Arians offer another excuse, St. Peter’s 
words in Acts, “Be it known unto you, all ye house of Israel, that God hath 
made this Jesus whom ye crucified both Lord and Christ.” 154 (2) And again 
they say, “Here we find ‘made’ in scripture”; and they do not see that the 
phrase, “this Jesus”—for the phrase is self-explanatory—means the Lord’s 
human nature. < The meaning* > is clear from “this Jesus whom ye cruci¬ 
fied." This is < plainly* > the flesh which they crucified, for < it is clear 
that > they crucified flesh. (3) And thus the Lord says in the Gospel, “But 
now ye seek to kill me, a man that hath told you the truth which I have 
heard of my Father,” 155 < declaring himself man* > but not separating his 
Godhead from his manhood. (4) For neither was Christ’s Godhead sepa¬ 
rate from his manhood when he was about to suffer, nor when he suffered 
was the human nature abandoned by the Word. But no more had the 
impassible Word previously suffered; he suffered < only > in the suffering 
flesh. For the same name truly applies to both natures and is given to the 
divine nature and to the human. The human nature of the Word himself 
is Christ, and yet Christ is the Lord in the human nature itself. (5) But the 
suffering is in the flesh, as Peter said, “Christ suffered for us in flesh" — 
to show the divine nature’s impassibility—and again, “dying in the flesh, 
brought to life in the Spirit.” 156 

Thus Peter said “this Jesus whom ye crucified” to show that the sacred 
human nature was not abandoned by the impassible and uncreated Word, 
but was united with the uncreated Word on high. (6) And this is why he 
said, “God hath made Lord and Christ” 157 the thing that was conceived 
by Mary, the thing that had been united with Godhead. For Mary is not 
divine by nature, and for this reason he adds “made.” And so, when Mary 
asked him, “How shall this be, seeing I know not a man?” the angel Gabriel 
said, “The Spirit of the Lord shall come upon thee and the power of the 
highest shall overshadow thee. Therefore also that which shall be born 
shall be called holy, the Son of God.” 158 

42,7 But when he said, “that which shall be born," he showed unques¬ 
tionably that the divine Word is indubitably a Son, not created, not made. 
(8) And as to the human nature which was born of Mary, he showed, 
by adding “that which is born < shall > also < be called holy, the Son of 
God >,” that God had made < even the thing that was born > Christ and 
Lord. And as everything about the other passages has been fully dealt with 
and presents no difficulty, here too everything about his human nature had 
been dealt with, and for those who are attending to their salvation there 
is no bypath. (9) For the Word is a living Word from a living Father—the 
Father’s Son, not his creature. But everything in the human nature has 
been dealt with, so that no one may suppose that he is an apparition, or 
that his flesh is co-essential with his Godhead on high, but everyone [will 
realize] that the human nature is united in one impassibility, especially 
after his resurrection from the dead. For scripture says, “He dieth no more, 
death hath no more dominion over him.” 159 (10) There is one Lord, one 
Christ, one King, seated at the Father’s right hand; that which is physical 
and spiritual is one union, one spiritual Godhead, both natures radiant 
and glorious. (11) But since I feel that the passage has been sufficiently 
expounded I shall pass it by; and let me take up the discussion by < going 
on* > to < warn > my hearers against the other parts of their < foolish¬ 
ness > which they have invented for the overthrow of their hearers. 160 

43,1 For again, they say, “If he is of the Father’s essence why does he 
not know the hour and the day, but by his own admission acknowledges 
to the disciples that he does not know the things the Father knows and 
says, ‘Of that day and of that hour knoweth no man, not even the angels 
in heaven or the Son, but the Father only.’ 161 (2) If the Father knows,” they 
say, “and he doesn’t know, how can the Father’s and the Son’s Godhead be 
the same, when the Son doesn’t know what the Father does?” 

43,3 But not knowing their human frailty, they seize, to their own 
harm, on everything that the Only-begotten, in his divine wisdom, teaches 
mystically for the assurance of the truest knowledge—as horrid serpents, 
when caught by a crafty hunter, take the bait to their own destruction. 
They do not know that falsehood will never stand, while the truth always 
keeps its own sons straight and confounds falsehood. (4) Those who har¬ 
bor this evil suspicion of Christ from the first must tell us which is by 
nature greater and more important to know—God the Lord of all and the 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, or the day which is brought to its dawning 
by the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, and the hour when it dawns. 
But if they are asked that question, the truth itself will surely oblige them 
to say that the Father is greater, as indeed he is. 
,5 Now if the Son says, “Neither knoweth any man the Father save 
the Son, and no man knoweth the Son save the Father,” 162 when he knows 
the greater thing, the Father, how can he not know the lesser thing? But 
these words are divine and spoken by the Floly Spirit, and are unknow¬ 
able by those who have not received the gift and grace of the Holy Spirit. 
(6) For such are the Arians with their wavering spirit and feeble intellect, 
and they slip into hurtful deviations even in their minor ones. 

,1 For the Lord’s own words will step out to meet them, “Be ye ready, 
< let > your loins < be > girded about and let there be lamps in your hands, 
and be ye as good servants, awaiting their Master. For like a thief in the 
night, so will the day come.” 163 And the holy apostle says, “Ye are not 
children of the night but of the day, lest the day should come upon you as 
a thief.” 164 (2) If, then, the children of the day are not hidden by the dark¬ 
ness, but are ready because “Their Master cometh in a day they know not 
and at an hour they await not,” 165 then, because of his brilliant being and 
his Godhead, will not < He who > gives them being be different from his 
servants, the sons of the day? Or, like those who do not know the day and 
are unprepared, will he be caught in ignorance and subject to deficiency? 
(3) Who but the < in >sane could suppose these things of the Lord, that 
he will be like his subjects and disciples—or like those who, from their 
unpreparedness and ignorance, are inferior to these? That is just silly. 

,4 Now if these things are not possible, but the explanation, when 
compared with it, turns out to contradict the saying, we need to see 
what explanation we can find that will leave both saying and explanation 
uncontradicted and prevent our deviating from the truth. For the Lord 
cannot lie, and can give no expositions for our salvation in vain. 

,5 Thus the Father knows [the day], the Son knows, and the Holy 
Spirit knows. For nothing in the Father is different from the Son, nor is 
anything in the Son different from the Spirit. In every Sect, when I needed 
to, I have shown with authentic proofs that the Trinity is one Godhead 
and has no internal differences but is all perfection—three Perfects, one 
glory and one sovereignty. 

,1 But you will ask me, “Why did he say this, then?” And I have 
already given an explanation of this elsewhere. 166 But nothing need keep 
me from adding to the same things and telling the same truths; “To me 
it is not burdensome, but it will be a safeguard” 167 for the readers and 
refutatory for the opposition. The reason for this is as follows. (2) Christ 
has made incidental mention, in the same sentence, of three ranks: the 
Father, himself, and the angels in heaven. And he has attributed knowing 
to the Father, implying not only acquaintance and knowledge but every¬ 
thing that is always indubitably controlled, brought about and made by 
the Father and the Son. (3) Indeed the Father knows the day—knows it, 
has fashioned and made it, and < at the same time > judged, as he said 
in the Gospel according to John, “The Father judgeth no man, but hath 
given all judgment to the Son 168 —in giving judgment he has judged; in 
judging, then, he knew [the day]; knowing, he is aware of when it will 
come. (4) For “He that believeth not on the Son is judged already” 169 —not 
in the sense that the judgment is past, but that what will happen then is 
already made plain, just as any particular thing follows from this [or that 
cause]. For scripture is aware of more than one sort of “knowledge”; and in 
my frequent returns to the main point I have never ceased to clarify and 
explain each subject with the similes and examples which have already 
been discussed. 

46,1 So let’s take < up > the discussion again < too >, from the begin¬ 
ning, and speak about these things. What do you mean, people? Did or 
didn’t Adam know Eve his wife even before their disobedience and trans¬ 
gression? And you can’t contradict the truth. (2) Even though you prefer 
not to deal fairly with the sense of this, you will be exposed, for scripture 
says, “They were naked and were not ashamed.” 170 For if they were naked 
and not blind 171 they saw and knew each other. For neither can you deny 
this and not admit that they could see; “Eve saw that the tree was good for 
food and goodly to look upon.” 172 Thus they saw and knew. 

And by knowing and seeing they recognized each other. (3) But it was 
much later when scripture said, “And Adam knew Eve his wife” It speaks 
of the first knowledge and sight in the sense of knowledge gained by 
seeing and intellection, but in the case of the second acquaintance and 
knowledge it is describing knowledge by experience. (4) Thus the sacred 
scripture says the same of David in his old age, “And David was old and 
could not keep warm. And his servants said, Let a virgin be sought for the 
king. And there was found Abishag the Shunamite.” 173 And it says, “And 
she warmed him, and he slept by her side, and David knew her not.” 174 
(5) How could he not know her when she was close to his body and slept 
beside him? But here scripture is describing, not knowledge by intellec¬ 
tion but knowledge by experience. 

,6 Indeed it is the same with Jacob. When he was herding with Leah 
and Rachel for seven years he knew them. But when the scripture speaks 
of their lawful conjugal intercourse it says, “He knew Leah his wife.” 175 The 
first knowing was by intellection and sight, but the second acquaintance 
and knowing was by experience and activity. 

,7 And likewise in the sacred scripture “The Lord knoweth them 
that are his” 176 doesn’t mean that he doesn’t know those who aren’t his, 
but refers to the activity of the Lord’s assistance. And [so with] “Depart 
from me, all ye workers of iniquity. I never knew you.” 177 Did he have 
no intellectual knowledge of them? But because they were not worthy of 
him he withholds his personal knowledge from them. And elsewhere he 
says, (8) “You have I known of all nations.” 178 [If we take this literally], all 
the nations, and the entire human population, have been left out of his 
knowledge. On the contrary, aren’t the hairs of each one’s head known 
< by > him—of those who serve, and those who disobey him? And “God 
knoweth the ways on the right hand.” 179 Doesn’t he know the ways on 
the left? And how much of this sort can be said of the different kinds of 
knowledge! 

47,1 And so with God’s only-begotten Son. Since < he says >, “The Father 
hath given judgment to the Son,” 180 he attributed the knowledge of per¬ 
sonal acquaintance and experience to the Father. For “No one knoweth the 
day save the Father” 181 is meant in two ways. He knows when it comes— 
indeed, the day and hour come by his authority—and he knows it < by 

acting >. For there has already been activity on his part, the delegation of 
the judgment to the Only-begotten. 

47,2 And thus the same knowledge is in the only-begotten Son of God, 
since he is God and no different from the Father. For he himself knows the 
day, he brings it himself, carries it on, brings it to an end, and judges, and 
without him it cannot come. (3) But he does not know it through activ¬ 
ity yet, that is, he has not yet judged. The impious are still impious, the 
unrighteous covet, fornicators, adulterers and idolaters commit iniquity, 
the devil is at work, sects arise, and imposture does its work until God’s 
only-begotten Son brings the day itself, and gives each his just due. And 

< then* > he will know it < through activity* >, that is, [know] it through 
deed and power. (4) And in the Father knowledge is complete in two 
ways, but in the Son it is there by intellection and is not unknown, but has 
not yet been completed by activity, that is, he has not yet judged. 

47,5 But knowledge has been withheld from the holy angels in two 
ways—< in that they do not yet know [the day] > intellectually, and 

< also > that they do not yet know it through activity, that is, through the 
fulfillment of their function. For they have not yet been directed to go out, 
gather the impious in bundles like tares and prepare them for burning. 
(6) And you see, beloved and servants of God, that all these people who 
welcome shocking notions because of some preconception of their own, 
have gone to war in vain, and directed against themselves their various 
attempts to blaspheme the Son of God as lesser and inferior. 

48,1 But now that we have also explained this sufficiently let us once 
again, by the power of God, devote our attention to their other argu¬ 
ments. Although these great heretics who are game for anything do not 
have beliefs like the Manichaeans or like many other sects, still, even 
though they hold that Christ’s fleshliness is real, they hold even this inad¬ 
equately and not in the fullest sense. (2) They confess that the Savior truly 
had flesh; but when they learn from the Gospel itself that he tired from 
his journey, was hungry and thirsty, and went to sleep and got up, they 
put all this together and apply it to his Godhead as though they wanted 
to separate his Godhead from the Father’s essence for reasons like the 
following. 182 (3) For they say, “If he is of the Father, but the Father does 
not tire or thirst or hunger as the sacred scripture says, “He shall not weary 
not hunger nor thirst nor sleep, and of his counsel there is no finding 
out” 183 —(4) if these things are characteristic of the Son, they say, “then 
he is different from the Father’s essence and nature.” And they themselves 
will admit that before the incarnation these things did not apply to the 
Only-begotten. However, when they are forced to admit this and come 
to the things he did in his human nature, and hear that naturally he did 
these things because he had taken a body, yielding to them for his legiti¬ 
mate needs like a mule yielding to a chariot because he had taken flesh 
in reality and not appearance, then they claim that this was not due to 
his flesh alone. 

49,1 For in fact [flesh] cannot of itself thirst or grow tired. But those 
who have left the road and turned off on paths that lead in the opposite 
direction do not know that the Son of God did not simply take flesh at 
his coming, but also took a soul, a mind and everything human except 
for sin, and was < truly begotten >, though not of a man’s seed, but of 
the holy virgin Mary by the Holy Spirit. (2) < But if* > they will not admit 
< themselves* > that he has taken a soul, < they will be made fools of* > 
by this arguent against them, which is the simplest of all the replies to 
their nonsense. 184 (3) The true God—< who > says of himself, “I am the 
truth”—himself acknowledges that “My soul is troubled,” 185 “My soul is 
exceeding sorrowful,” 186 and “I have power to lay down my soul and to 
take it” 187 —[this last] to show that, as God, he has this power, < but that 
by his incarnation he has truly become man* >. (4) For no [mere] man 
could say this; no one has the power to lay his soul down and take it. But 
when Christ speaks of a soul he shows that he has become man in reality, 
not appearance. 

49,5 And again, [he says], “I am the good shepherd who layeth down 
his soul for the sheep.” 188 And to show the reality of these things he said 
to his Father on the cross, “Into thy hands I commend my spirit”; 189 and 
when the soldiers came, the scripture says, “They found that he had 
already given up the ghost.” 190 (6) And again, “Crying with a loud voice” he 
said, “Eli, Eli, lema sabachthani, that is, My God, my God, why hast thou 
forsaken me?” 191 —I have also explained this way of speaking earlier— 
and, as the Gospel says, “gave up the ghost.” (7) For when the truth says, 
“He gave up the ghost,” “into thy hands,” "My soul is troubled,” and all the 
rest, who would be < so > foolish as to believe such a bunch of half blind 
dreamers and ignore the actual credible statements of the divine Word? 

50,1 And then, like pirates mutilating sound bodies, hunting out of 
each scripture things which have been said well and rightly, they appeal 
to some expression which the scripture often uses figuratively. And they 
like to cite in a literal sense something that has been said figuratively, 
but interpret a literal and unequivocal statement as an allegory of some¬ 
thing else. (2) They jump right up and cite some words from the holy 
Isaiah which were spoken in the person of the Father, “Behold, my servant 
shall understand, my beloved in whom I am well pleased, whom my 
soul loveth,” 192 as though this is the Father speaking; for so indeed he is. 
(3) “Well, now,” they say, “has the Father taken a soul too?” But if we say, 
“Of course not! What can this be but a figurative expression?” they reply, 
“Then what was said by the Son is figurative too.” (4) And they think they 
can get an occasion against the truth in this way, but it won’t be given 
them. The truth stands unadorned on its own feet, undefeated and with 
no need for decoration. 
50,5 For let’s see what both of these mean. If the Father became cor¬ 
poreal, assumed flesh and said these words, he really took a soul. But if 
the Father did not assume flesh and still said, “my soul,” this is a figure of 
speech referring to God, to safeguard the [Son’s] legitimacy and show the 
legitimacy of the Father’s relationship to the Son. (6) But one cannot say 
the same of the Son in this respect. The Father did not take flesh, while 
the Son assumed flesh. The Father did not become man, but the Son did. 

50,7 Something similar may be said of the Father. As he says, “My soul 
hath loved him,” 193 in this passage, so he says, “I have found David the son 
of Jesse, a man after mine heart,” 194 “My heart is far from them.” 195 (8) If 
we take what is said of the soul figuratively because “My soul hath loved” 
is a figure of speech, then what is said of the heart is also figurative. And 
clearly, this must be evident to any sensible person, (g) Therefore, if the 
Father speaks figuratively of a soul and a heart, which he did not take— 

for he did not assume flesh—things of this sort are applied to the Father 
in a figurative sense. But the same is not to be supposed of the Son; for 
the Son took flesh, and the entire human constitution. 

,1 This will serve as a reply to anyone who speaks figuratively of 
the Son with regard to < the > humanity, since there is no < allegorical > 
expression even* > in a part of a word, because Christ truly took human 
nature. (2) For if what is said of the Son’s soul is allegory and we must 
take the language about it figuratively, then the same has been said of his 
heart. And finally we will admit that everything about him is appearance 
and not truth. (3) < Therefore >, according to Arius’ contentious argument, 
the Word cannot have received a heart either when he came—or a liver, 
flesh, entrails, bones, or anything like that. In the last analysis all of these 
are allegories and meant figuratively—or else he just received a blob for 
a body, without any insides. (4) In that case, how could he eat and drink? 
Forget it! For if the Father speaks of a soul and a heart but in his case 
the meaning is allegorical and the expression figurative, then < the Arians 
should also take the heart* > figuratively in the Son’s case, since they deny 
that the Son has taken a soul. 

51,5 But if, when pressed, they cannot deny Christ’s heart because they 
admit that the Lord received the whole bodily frame, therefore, given 
their < admission > that there are two different “hearts,” the one admitted 
to be real and the other allegorical, in the case of Christ’s “soul” the word 
is accurate, and not allegorical or figurative. (6) However, since Christ’s 
human nature is complete in every respect—in body, soul, mind, heart, 
and everything human except sin—he naturally could do what men do, 
and yet be entirely complete in Godhead, with impassibility. 196 (7) His 
Godhead cannot be less glorious than the Father’s perfection, but he will 
be made complete by his human nature and his thirst, hunger, drinking, 
eating, sleeping, discouragement, while his Godhead is impassible. And 
again their argument about this has failed, since Christ became flesh while 
being God. 

,1 But if they say, “If he was of the Father why did he become flesh?” 
our reply would be, “What do you say about the angels?” For it is plain to 
everyone that Arians admit the angels were made by the Son. (2) Indeed, 
they also blaspheme the Holy Spirit by venturing to say that he was cre¬ 
ated by the Son, although he is uncreate, proceeding from the Father and 
receiving of the Son. (3) Hence, if they dare to say this of the Holy Spirit, 

how much more will they be unable to deny in the case of the angels, 
who are created beings, that they have received their existence from the 
Only-begotten? 

If, then, the angels he created were created spiritual but are his cre¬ 
ation in spite of that, and, as his workmanship, are infinitely far below his 
essence and yet they have not taken flesh—what do you say about that? 
(4) Are they greater than the Son even though created by him? Or the 
Holy Spirit too? Why didn’t he come to flesh, put on flesh and become 
man—either the Holy Spirit of God or one of the holy angels? (5) The Son 
surely did not assume flesh because of an inferiority to the Father. In that 
case the angels would surely have assumed flesh, or even the Spirit. But 
since the Son, who is the Father’s wisdom, power and Word, had made 
all things himself with the Father and the Holy Spirit, he assumed flesh 
(6) to show that the reason for Adam’s transgression or disobedience was 
not that Adam was a creature or that God had made sin, but Adam’s own 
choice, so that [the Son] could carry his righteous judgment through as 
Isaiah said, “A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he 
not quench, till he shall carry the judgment through to victory, and in his 
name shall the gentiles hope”— 197 as David said of him,” “Thou shalt be 
victorious when thou art judged.” 198 

52,7 For he was judged in order to silence his opponents by judging 
justly; for no one will be able to oppose his righteous judgment. For he wore 
the body and kept it undefiled. For it was certainly not at the instance of 
the creator, who is not responsible for Adam’s sin, that that which was in 
man, that is, in Adam, from the beginning came to the point of becoming 
sin with the result that Adam sinned. The creator allowed Adam freedom 
of choice and each person is responsible for his own sin. (8) And thus, 
< although he was > not responsible [for sin], the divine Word, the creator, 
who with his Father and the Holy Spirit created man, the immortal and 
undefiled Word, became man of his own good pleasure, by some ineffable 
mystery of wisdom. And in his extreme loving kindness, under no compul¬ 
sion but of his own free will, he assumed all his creature’s characteristics 
for his creature’s sake to “condemn sin in the flesh,” 199 annul the curse 
on the cross, utterly destroy destruction in the grave, and by descending 
to hades with soul and Godhead make void the covenant with hades and 
break “the sting of death.” 200 (g) But the ungrateful turn good things com¬ 
pletely to bad and no longer thank the kind, perfect, good Son of a good 
Father for the things for which < one should > thank him. Instead they 
show ingratitude by attributing frailties to his Godhead, things they are 
not able to prove, since the truth is evident to everyone. 

53,1 And now that these have been expounded I shall go on in turn to 
other arguments in succession. For they quote the text in the Gospel, “The 
Father who sent me is greater than I,” 201 with a bad interpretation. In the 
first place it says, “The Father who sent me,” not, “the Father who created 
me.” (2) For all the sacred scriptures show his true sonship to the Father. 
They say, “The Father begot me,” 202 "I came forth from the Father and am 
come,” 203 “I am in the Father and the Father in me,” 204 and, “the Father 
who sent me.” 205 And nowhere have they said, “the Father who created 
me,” or, “the Father who made me.” 

53,3 And why do they keep heaping up things that are not so? “The 
Father who sent me is greater than I”—what could be more proper? More 
cogent? More necessary? More fitting? Who but his true Son, the One 
begotten of him, is the proper person to glorify the Father? (4) For the 
Father glorifies the Son and the Son glorifies the Father. And the Son glori¬ 
fies the Father both to be an example 206 to us, and < for the sake > of his 
glorification of the Father as one union and glory [with himself], teaching 
us that his honor is the Father’s honor, as he has said, “He that honoreth 
not the Son as he honoreth the Father, the wrath of God abideth upon 
him.” 207 

53,5 But in what way do Arians think that he is “greater?” In bulk? Time? 
Height? Age? Worth? Which of these is in God, for us to conceive of? Time 
does not apply to the Godhead, so that < the > Son who is begotten of the 
Father but not in time, might be considered inferior. Nor does the Godhead 
allow for advancement, or the Son might achieve the Father’s greatness 
by advancing to it. (6) For if the Son of God is called the Son of God as 
the result of advancement, then he [once] had many equals and advanced 
by being called higher in rank, but was [once] lower than someone who 
outranked him. (7) But the scripture says, “Who shall be likened unto the 
Lord among the sons of God?” 208 since all things are termed sons colloqui¬ 
ally, but he alone is Son by nature, not grace—for “He hath found out every 
path of understanding, and none shall be declared his equal.” 209 

But what do Arians say? “The Father surpasses the Son in elevation.” 
(8) Where is the Godhead located? Or is it bounded by space so that 
“bigger” might be shown by circumference? < Forget it*>, “God is spirit!” 210 
And their heretical invention is a complete failure. Let us pass this by too, 
beloved, and go on to the rest of their arguments. 

54,1 For they say that the sender is not like the sent, but that sender 
and sent differ in power because the one sends, while the other is sent. 
And if the meaning of the truth were what they say, the whole subject 
of our knowledge could not be traced to one unity of truth, power and 
Godhead. (2) For if two were meeting or two were sending, the Son would 
no longer be a son, but a brother—who had another brother, no longer a 
father. 211 But if they were related by identity or adoption, or if one were 
to send himself, or if the two sent together or arrived together, they would 
show that there are two Godheads and not one unity. (3) But here there 
is a Sender and a Sent, showing that there is one Source 212 of all good 
things, the Father; but next after the Source comes One who—to corre¬ 
spond with his name of Son and Word, and not with any other—is one 
Source springing from a Source, the Son come forth, ever with the Father 
but begotten < without beginning and not in time as the scripture says* >, 
“For with thee is the source of life.” 213 (4) And to show the same of the 
Holy Spirit < it adds >, “In thy light shall we see light,” showing that the 
Father is light, the Son is the Father’s light, and the Holy Spirit is light 
and a Source springing from a Source, [that is], from the Father and the 
Only-begotten—the Holy Spirit. “For out of his belly shall flow rivers of 
water springing up unto eternal life; but,” says the Gospel, “he said this of 
the Holy Spirit.” 214 

54,5 And again, to teach his disciples his co-essentiality with the 
Father, he says, “If any man open to me, I and my Father will come in 
and make our abode with him.” 215 And [here] he no longer said, “I shall 
be sent by my Father,” but, “I and my Father will < make our abode > with 
him,” with the Son knockimg and the Father enterimg with him, so that 
it is everlasting, and neither is the Father separated from the Son nor the 
Son separated from his Father. (6) And so he says in another passage, 
“I am the way, and by me shall they go in unto the Father.” 216 And lest 
it be thought that < he > is less than the Father because they go in to the 
Father by him, he says, “No man can come unto me unless my heavenly 
Father draw him.” 217 (7) Thus the Father brings him to the Son and the 
Son brings him to the Father, but brings him in the I loly Spirit. The Trinity 
is forever eternal, one unity of Godhead, three Perfects, one Godhead. And 
the Arians’ argument has failed. 

,1 But again, they say, “Why did Christ tell his disciples, 'I go unto 
my Father and your Father, and unto my God and your God’? 218 If he 
acknowledges him as his God, how can he be his equal or legitimately 
begotten of him as Son?”—showing that they are entirely ignorant of God, 
and in no way “illumined by the light of the Gospel.” 219 

,2 Always, and in every generation, one who has examined and 
investigated will know the meaning of the truth of the perfect knowledge 
of our Savior and of his equality with the Father. But these people itch 
from being wrapped up in Jewish thinking, and are annoyed with the Son 
of God just as the Jews said, “For no evil deed do we stone thee, but that 
thou, being a man, callest thyself Son of God, making thyself equal with 
God.” 220 (3) They are annoyed too because they have gotten into the same 
state as the Jews 221 and Pharisees, and will not call the Son equal to the 
Sire who begot him. 

55,4 For observe the accuracy of the scriptures! The sacred scripture 
never used this expression before the incarnation. The Father says “Let us 
make man” 222 to the Son, calling the Son his fellow creator and showing 
that he is his own Son and equal. (5) And the Son never said, “my God 
and your God,” < before the incarnation, but* >, “And Adam heard the 

voice of God walking in the garden, 223 and < “God said to Noah >, Make to 
thyself an ark of acacia wood,” 224 and, “The Lord rained from the Lord,” 225 
and “The Lord said unto Moses, I am the God of Abraham and the God of 
Isaac and the God of Jacob”; 226 and David says, “The Lord said unto my 
Lord, Sit thou on my right hand.” 227 And the Lord never said, “my God 
and your God.” 

55,6 But when he had taken our body, “appeared on earth and con¬ 
sorted with men,” 228 and become one of us, then he said “my God and 
your God, and my Father and your Father” to his disciples, whom it was 
his duty to be like in all respects except sin: “my Father” by nature in the 
Godhead, and "your Father” by grace because of me, in the adoption. “My 
God” because I have taken your flesh, and “your God” by nature and in 
truth. (7) And thus everything is crystal clear, and nothing in the sacred 
scripture is contradictory or has any taint of death, as the Arians pretend 
in concocting their wicked arguments. But again, I think this has been 
sufficiently explained, and shall next go on to the rest. 

56,1 For again, they say that the Holy Spirit is the creature of a creature 
because of, “By the Son all things were made,” 229 as the scripture says- 
stupidly seizing on certain lines, not reading the text as it is worded but, 
with wrong suppositions and apart from the text misinterpreting, in terms 
of their wrong supposition, something that has been correctly said. (2) For 
the divine Gospel did not say this of the Holy Spirit. It said of all created 
things that anything which is created was made through the Word and by 
the Word. If you read further, the line, “All things were made through him, 
and without him was not one thing made,” includes the words, “that was 
made,” to make it clear that all [created] things were made by him, and 
not a single thing without him. 

56,3 Then again it says, “In him was life.” 230 For here too the sequence 
of St. John’s [expressions] must be made complete as he goes on with 
his confessions that non-existent things < have been made > 231 in existent 
ones. For “In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, 

and the Word was God.” 232 (4) Since [he says] “was,” and was,” and “In 
him was life,” 233 and “that was the true light,” 234 and “He was in the 
world” 235 and all < the rest* >, the blessed John, by the Holy Spirit’s inspi¬ 
ration, is making it plain with this “was” that “All that was made, was made 
through him.” 236 But the Maker of all the things that were made is prior 
to them all. 

56,5 However, the scripture says that all things were made through 
him but did not say what the things that were made were. For there was 
never any supposition of wickedness, so that no one could suppose things 
that were not true and blaspheme God’s changeless and unalterable Holy 
Spirit. (6) It is on their account that the Lord says, “If any man say a word 
against the Son of Man, it shall be forgiven him. But if any man say aught 
against the Holy Spirit it shall not be forgiven him, neither here nor in the 
world to come.” 237 For the whole of their argument is ridiculous. 

56,7 One might, however, answer them in terms of their blasphemous 
supposition and say, “You hotshot sophists and word-twisters who want 
to count God’s Holy Spirit as a creature on account of, ‘All things were 
made through him,’ because of ‘all things,’ although the Holy Spirit is 
never counted in with ‘all things!’ (8) You should suppose, then, in terms 
of your blasphemous supposition—if, indeed, there is anyone else who is 
worse than you—that the Father too was made through the Son.” For the 
line which says that all things were made through him is comprehensive, 
(g) But if it is blasphemous to think any such thing of the Father, and fool¬ 
ish, the like applies to those who suspect it of the Holy Spirit, who belongs 
with the Father and the Son. 

56,10 For if he were were a thing that is made he would not be reck¬ 
oned in with the uncreated Father and the uncreated Son. But because 
he is uncreated he is so reckoned; the scripture said, “Go baptize in the 
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.” 238 And how 
can the Spirit be created when it is testified of him that “He proceeded 
from the Father” 239 and “received of me,” 240 and through him man’s full 
salvation, and everything required for the human nature, was made com¬ 
plete. (11) For scripture says of the Lord, “God anointed him with the Holy 
Spirit.” 241 But the Father would not have anointed Christ’s human nature, 
which had been united in one Godhead with the divine Word, with a 
creature. However, since the Trinity is one, three Perfects, one Godhead, 
this needed to be done for the Son in the dispensation of the incarnation, 
so that the Trinity, completely glorified in all things, would be observed to 
be < one >. I have cited no [mere] one or two texts against all the sects in 
my discussions of the Spirit, to prove that he is the Spirit of God, glorified 
with the Father and the Son, uncreated, changeless and perfect. And, in 
its turn, the argument against themselves that the trouble-makers < have 
invented > about him has proved a failure. 

57,1 But again, let's devote our attention to their other arguments. For 
they say in turn, though they do not have a sound understanding of the 
text, that the Savior himself said, “Why callest thou me good? There is 
one good, God,” 242 and thereby separated himself from the essence and 
subsistence of the Father. 

But this whole thing is foolish. (2) If they do not think that the One who 
has done so much for us is good, who else is < good? But what > could 
be worse than this, that the One who gave his life for the sheep; who 
went willingly to the passion although he was the impassible God; who 
secured the forgiveness of sins for us; who worked cures in all Israel; 
who, of his own goodness, brought such a numerous people, in good¬ 
ness, to the Father—that the Promoter of goodness and Lord of peace, 
the Father’s good word begotten on high of the good Father, the Giver of 
food to all flesh, the Author of all goodness for men and all his creatures, 
is not considered good by the Arians! 

57,3 And since they have managed to forget it, they do not know that 
he threw the questioner’s word back at him in order to humble the over¬ 
weening insolence in him. A scribal type was boasting that he had exactly 
fulfilled the requirements of the Law. And to parade his own righteousness 
and goodness he said, “Good Master, what [more could] I do to inherit 
eternal life?” (4) And since he thought of himself as < endowed > with 
such great righteousness, the Lord, wishing to ascribe all goodness to God 
so that no fleshly being would indulge in vanity, said, “Why callest thou 
me good? None is good save God.” By saying such a thing when he was 

what he was and as great as he was, he intended to humble the arrogance 
of the speaker with his supposed righteousness, and expose what was in 
his heart, for with his lips he called him a good teacher, but he did not 
abide by his good teaching. 

57,5 And that he is good he teaches us himself by saying, “Many good 
works have I done among you; for which of them do ye stone me?” 243 To 
whom is this not clear and plain as day, particularly as many of his crea¬ 
tures are, and are called good, as the sacred scripture says? (6) See here, 
the sacred text tells of many good things. It says, “Saul, the son of Kish, 
of the tribe of Benjamin, was a good man, and from the shoulders and 
upward higher than all the people.” 244 

And “Samuel” was “good with the Lord and men” 245 And “The last word 
was better than the beginning.” 246 And, “Open thy good treasure, the 
heavenly.” 247 (7) But since these are creatures, and are shown by himself 
and his creatures to be good, how can it not be indisputably good to con¬ 
fess that the author of their being is good? But < not > to prolong the dis¬ 
cussion of this—I have spoken extensively of it everywhere—I shall once 
again go on to the next, and give the explanation of each expression. 

58,1 But these people who will try anything cite some other texts to 
sow the suspicion that there are defects in their Redeemer—if, indeed, 
they have been redeemed. For when the mother of the sons of Zebedee 
approached Jesus and begged that the one son should sit on his right and 
the other on his left when he came in his kingdom, he told them, “Ye 
know not what ye ask. Are ye able to drink the cup that I shall drink of? 
And they said, Yea. We are able. And he said to them, Ye shall drink of my 
cup, but to sit on my right hand or on my left is not mine to give, but is 
for them for whom it is prepared of my Father.” 248 (2) “Do you see,” they 
say, “how he has no authority independent of the Father’s, who has the 
authority to give it to anyone he chooses?” 

And who in his right mind would think such a thing? If the Son does 
not have authority, who does? “For,” he says, “the Father giveth life to the 
dead, and thus he hath granted the Son to give life to whom he will”; 249 

and, “All things have been delivered unto me of my Father.” 250 (3) Who 
could have any further doubt? But his sacred, wise saying is meant to 
show that nothing is awarded from respect of persons, but in accord with 
merit. For to grant is the Lord’s prerogative, but he grants to each accord¬ 
ing to his deserts. Each who has done something right receives < from 
the Lord > in accordance with his labor; and not mere giving is his sole 
prerogative, but giving to one who has made himself worthy. 

58,4 For I venture to say that giving [as such] is not the Lord’s preroga¬ 
tive although he has the power, but he does not wish [simply] to give. 
Nor is it the Holy Spirit’s although the Holy Spirit has the power to give, 
as the scripture says, “To one is given wisdom by the Spirit, to another 
divers kinds of tongues by the same Spirit, to another the interpretation 
of tongues, to another power, to another teaching, but it is one Spirit that 
divideth to every man as he will.” 251 And it didn’t say, “as he is directed,” 
but, “as he will.” (5) And “The Son giveth life to whom he will,” 252 and 
“The Father calleth whom he will to the Son.” 253 And again, neither the 
Father and the Son, nor the Holy Spirit, calls, gives, provides or awards 
from respect of persons, but as each person renders himself worthy; this 
is the meaning of, “It is not mine to give, but if you toil it will be prepared 
for you by my Father.” But < I shall give* > at the End, for “I am the life.” 254 
And I shall go right on to the others. 

5g,i They say, “Why do you say that he is of the Father’s perfect God¬ 
head? See here, the apostle says of him that ‘God hath raised him from 
the dead.’ 255 If he needs God’s help to raise him from the dead, then there 
is one person who raises him by his power; but the other person, the one 
who is raised by the power of the One who is able to do this, is inferior.” 

59,2 And how long must I tire myself out with the silly ideas of the 
people who give themselves headaches? Who raised Lazarus? Who raised 
the widow’s son at Nain? Who said, “Qumi talitha, Get up, child,” to the 
daughter of the ruler of the synagogue? On whose name did the apostles 
call, and the dead were raised? 

I suppose the apostles < said this to show* > that all this had been done 
at the Father’s good pleasure, by the will of the Son and with the consent 
of the Holy Spirit, because the apostles were in a dispute with Jews who 
thought that they were preaching apostasy from the God of the Law, and 
because they had received 256 from the Holy Spirit the knowledge that 
sects would set Christ in opposition to the will of the Father. (4) But this 
is not said to show any defect or weakness, or any difference between the 
divine Word’s essence and the Father’s. There are no differences. See, in 
the first instance, how the angel describes him when he asks Mary and 
the others, “Why seek ye the living among the dead?” 257 You see, he who 
was alive had risen in his Godhead and flesh; he was not with the dead. 
And what does the angel say to them? “He is risen. He is not here.” 258 He 
didn’t say, “God has raised him and is he not here?” but to show the power 
of the Savior he said that he had risen even living. 

5g,5 And again, he himself told his disciples before his passion, 
“Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man shall be delivered to 
be crucified, and the third day he shall rise again.” 259 ( 6) And he didn’t 
say, “< God > will raise him.” But he was plainly showing beforehand the 
control [over resurrection] of his power by saying, “1 have power to lay 
my soul down, and power to take it.” 260 (7) But since he had the power, 
why couldn’t he raise himself? When the apostle wrote, “God raised him 
from the dead,” 261 he said it to show that nothing in the economy of sal¬ 
vation has taken place without the Father’s will. For the apostle himself 
says in another passage, “Even though he died from weakness, he lives by 
power.” 262 

5g,8 If 1 could only pick the brains of these people who know all about 
the scripture, [and find] which weakness the Only-begotten had—[the 
Only-begotten] by whom the heaven has been spread out; by whom the 
sun was lit; (g) by whom the stars shone; by whom all things have been 
made from nothing. Which weakness does the apostle mean? Isn’t it the 
weakness the Word assumed when he came in our flesh, putting it on so 
as to bear our weakness? As the prophet’s oracle about him says, “He took 
our weaknesses and bare our illnesses.” 263 He who is life and the impas¬ 
sible God died because of our weakness in the flesh which we had made 
weaker [yet], but he lives by power. “For the Word is living and active 
and sharper than any two-edged sword.” 264 (10) Thus he died from weak¬ 
ness and lives by the power of his Godhead; but he lives in our flesh in 
which he accepted the passion. And it was because of this dispensation 
that the apostle said, “God raised him from the dead,” 265 to give token of 
the Father’s good pleasure. 

,1 They cite still another text from the Gospel according to Luke, one 
which is marvelous, choice, and in every way most useful. Which text? 
When the Lord, by his own will, was about to enter upon the passion, 
taking the disciples into the mount at that time he “went apart from them 
about a stone’s cast, and went and prayed and said, “Father, if it be pos¬ 
sible, let this cup pass from me that I drink it not. Nevertheless, not what 
I will, but what thou wilt.” 266 

,2 And first, once more these people pretend and say, “Do you see 
how he speaks coaxingly and shows a will that is distinguished from the 
Father’s by saying, ‘Not what I will, but what thou wilt?’ How can it be 
the same essence,” they ask, “when there is one will in him, but another 
in the Father?” 

And they are ignorant of the entire meaning of this. For this is why 
the apostle said, “O the depth of the riches and wisdom and knowledge 
of God!” 267 (3) And how could Christ be speaking of a will of his own 
beside the Father’s will when he himself tells his disciples, “My soul is 
troubled, and what shall I say, 'Father, save me from this hour?’ ” 268 as 
though he were speaking in advance about the text [in question], and 
using the words, “What shall I say, ‘Father, save me from this hour?’ ” in a 
way that was equivocal? He means, “Should I say [such a thing as] this? 
For for this cause came I unto this hour.” 269 (4) He came, not unwillingly 
but willingly. For earlier he says, “I have a cup to drink, and how eager 
I am to drink it! And I have a baptism to be baptized with, and what will 
I if I were already baptized!” 270 If he is willing and eager, then, and says 
that he has come for this purpose, how can he be showing that he has 
one will, and the Father has another? (5) And, being kindly and willing to 
spare Abraham’s seed, since he would be betrayed by Israel he was put¬ 
ting in a word for the people. 

However, it was the Father’s will that his provision be executed in this 
way by the children of Israel, although they were accessory to their own 
betrayal of the Son and not compelled to it by God; and the Son’s will was 
not different from the Father’s. (6) But it was essential that he show this 
even here to ascribe the whole of the divine unity to the Father, leaving 
no division between the one unity and human nature. 

61,1 And Arius adds next that “ ‘being in agony while he prayed,’ ” < as > 
we find in the Gospel according to Luke, and “ ‘He sweat, and his sweat 
was as it were drops of blood falling to the ground. And there appeared 
an angel of the Lord strengthening him.’ ” 271 (2) Those nit-pickers jump 
up at once as though they had found an opening against an enemy, and 
add, “Do you see that he even needed the strength of angels? An angel 
strengthened him, for he was in agony.” 

And they have no idea that if he did not have all these things, including 
“Not my will, but thine,” the human nature of Christ would have been an 
illusion; and if Christ had not been in agony and sweat had not poured 
from his body, there would be some sense in the theory of the unreality of 
the human nature that Manichaeans and Marcionites yap about, < since 
Christ would be an apparition > and not absolutely real. (3) But < he did > 
all these things to make our salvation sure < because > he assumed every¬ 
thing < that is ours >, and as concessions said certain things, in truth, not 
deceit, that reflected human frailty. < For example >, [he said] “not my 
will,” to show the reality of his flesh, confound those who say he has no 
human mind, and frustrate the people who deny that he has flesh. 

61,4 For every divine word, standing firm amid the sons of darkness, 
confounds the darkness but enlightens the sons of the truth. See how 
much helpful material there is in this saying. No sweat comes from bodi¬ 
less beings. In this way he showed that his flesh was real and not an appa¬ 
rition. < And > without a soul and a mind there can be no agony of a flesh 
that is united to the Godhead. By experiencing agony he showed that he 
had soul, body and mind at once, which is why he could show agony. 
(5) And again, by saying, “not my will, but thine,” he revealed a mind truly 
human though without sin. 

For his Godhead is always in the Father, the Father is in the Son, and 
the Son is in the Holy Spirit, perfectly possessing all things, and the Son’s 
intent is no different from the Father’s nor the Father’s from the Son’s, 
or the Ffoly Spirit’s from the Father’s and the Son’s. (6) If the Son desires 
what the Father does not will, he will indeed be a mere man as you say 
and, from inferiority, < subject > to the will of the Father. But this is not 
the case, never think it! By speaking of things that are reflective of human 
frailty he shows the reality of his incarnation and the perfection of his 
human nature, so that he will be our salvation in every way and we will 
not perceive one thing in place of another and be deprived of the truth. 

62,1 But as to his being seen to be strengthened by angels, what could 
be more proper than this? What more necessary? See, we have found the 
application of the passage in the great Song written by Moses, “Let my 
utterance be awaited as the rain,” 272 and shortly afterwards, “Let all the 
sons of God worship him, and all the angels of God strengthen him” 273 — 
(2) not so that the angels may give him strength. He did not need the 
strengthening of the angels. They “strengthen” him in the sense of giv¬ 
ing him the due acknowledgment of his strength. (3) Indeed, for all our 
weakness we too have often blessed God, often strengthened God—not 
because God needs our blessing, but we acknowledge the power of his 
blessing. And we say, giving the full particulars, “Thine is the power, thine 
the might, thine the honor, thine the glory, thine the blessing, thine the 
strength, thine the power.” (4) Not that we provide God with strength by 
saying “Thine is the might, thine the power, thine the blessing,” not that 
we have given God power, have blessed God. But by corroboration and 
confirmation we have confessed the power ( 5 uvap.iv) of God and ascribed 
the strength (iaxuv) to God. 

62,5 Thus the angel too was amazed at that time, and astonished at 
the abundance of his Master’s loving kindness because, although he was 
God, and was worshiped in heaven with the Father, and served by his 
own angels, he submitted to such a < depth* > [of humiliation] as to come 
willingly by his own desire and assume flesh—(6) and not only this, but 
< also > submitted to suffering, even to consignment to the cross, for 
his own creation, the human race, “tasting death, even the death of the 
cross,” 274 so that humankind could win the trophy against death through 
him, “destroy him that had the power of death, even the devil,” 275 and 
“triumph over every rule and authority.” 276 

,7 And so, in amazement and awe, to glorify and praise his Master 
as he stood in such an arena and with such remarkable deeds, the angel 
said to him, “Thine is the worship, thine the might, thine the power, thine 
the strength,” in fulfillment of the words that Moses had written, “Let all 
God’s angels give him strength.” 277 

,8 And you see, servants of Christ and sons of God’s holy church and 
orthodox faith, that there is nothing obscure or knotty in the sacred scrip¬ 
ture; everything has been written marvelously and marvelously fulfilled 
for our salvation. However, in their hostility to God’s only-begotten Son 
and the Holy Spirit, Arians, like enemies, think up all sorts of plans and 
subtleties, (g) But far be it from us to rely on human subtleties. We must 
keep our minds sound to glorify our Master and not conceive of any defect 
in him. For if the One who came to save all things has any defect, how can 
creation be saved from its own defects? 

63,1 Again, in their search for some text or other against the Savior, this 
new crop of Jews who are springing up again—for they are votaries of the 
Jewish opinion and no different from Jews except merely in name—they 
seize, like adversaries, on something else “to entangle him in his talk,” 278 
as the Gospel has said. (2) "On the cross,” they say, he said, ‘Eli, Eli, lema 
sabachthani, that is, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?’ ” And 
“You see him piteously begging and wailing,” they say, “and saying, Why 
hast thou forsaken me?’ ” 279 (3) And those whose minds are torpid from 
the poison of Arius’ madness, and who have no knowledge of God, do not 
know that all the human frailties in the Lord are to be confessed [as resid¬ 
ing] in his true human nature. 

63,4 In the first place, they do not realize that they are jumping from 
one thing to another in their thinking about him and have no fixed posi¬ 
tion. How can they, when they are not sound in mind? For they will some¬ 
times call the Savior himself Lord, Christ, before all ages, Master of angels 
and archangels, through whom all things were made—principalities and 
authorities, angels and archangels, the heavens and all things, the earth, 
all humanity and everything on earth, the sea and all that is in it. (5) How 
foolish of them to say such glorious things of him and not realize that 

< He who > in his Godhead < is > before the ages cannot say such a thing 
as, “My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?” 280 here in the person 
of his Godhead—He by whom heaven and earth were made, and angels 
and archangels, and in a word, all things visible and invisible. 

63,6 When was the Son forsaken by the Father, and when was the Son 
not in the Father and the Father not in the Son? For he came to earth 
as the Son and the divine Word, and yet he touched heaven, and all his 
enemies were filled with his glory. And he was in Mary and was made 
man, and yet filled all things by his power. (7) How could such a person, 
and One of such greatness, say piteously, “Eli, Eli, lema sabachthani, that 
is, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?” in his divine nature, 
though it was he himself who said, “I shall come again and shall not leave 
you desolate, but I shall come unto you.” 281 And he says again in another 
passage, “Verily I say unto you, All ye shall be offended because of me 
this night, and ye shall all leave me alone, and yet I am not alone, but 
the Father who begot me is with me.” 282 8) And again, “I go, and I shall 
send unto you the Holy Spirit, the Paraclete, who proceedeth from the 
Father and receiveth of me.” 283 And again, in another passage, he says, 
“I knock, and if any man open to me, we shall come unto him, I and my 
Father, and make our abode with him.” 284 This is as much as to say that he 
is not forsaken by the Father, but that the Father is always with the Son, 
just as the Holy Spirit is always with the Father and the Son. 

64,1 “Well then,” they say, “what did he mean when he said, ‘My God, 
my God, why hast thou forsaken me?’ ” But who cannot see that the words 
are uttered in the person of his human nature, reflecting human frailty? 
(2) His human nature [said this], though not by itself. (He never spoke 
from a separate divine nature and a separate human nature, as though 

< he were > sometimes the one and sometimes the other. He spoke with 
his manhood united with his Godhead as one holiness and therefore pos¬ 
sessed of perfect knowledge in it.) Appropriately for the manhood which 
had been united with God and joined to one divine nature, but which now 
saw its Godhead, with its soul, impelled to leave its holy body, it < pro¬ 
nounced the words > in the person of the Ford-man, that is, in the person 
of his human nature. (3) For the divine nature was about to accomplish all 
that the mystery of the passion involved and descend to the underworld 
with his soul, to secure the salvation there of all who had previously fallen 
asleep, I mean the holy patriarchs. Thus, when it was so impelled, Christ’s 
voice said, in the person of the human nature [speaking] to his divine 
nature itself, “My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?” 285 

,4 But this had to be, in order to fulfill, through him, the prophe¬ 
cies the sacred scriptures had made of him through his own prophets. 
And it was in fulfillment of the words against Hades which are said to 
Hades, seemingly by the man, so that though the archon Hades and Death 
intended to subdue a man he would unknowingly < seize > the < holy > 
Godhead < concealed > in the soul, and Hades himself would be subdued 
and death destroyed, fulfilling the saying, “Thou shalt not leave my soul in 
Hades, neither shalt thou suffer thine holy one so see corruption.” 286 

,5 For neither did the holy divine Word abandon the soul, nor was 
his soul abandoned in Hades. Unceasingly, the holy Trinity provides for 
all aspects of so great a mystery—the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, 
with the Son < become > fleshly but the Father incorporeal, and the Son, 
although unchangeable, incarnate by his own good pleasure and < made > 
flesh by the will of the incorporeal Holy Spirit. But all these provisions 
were made by the holy Trinity for the salvation of humankind. 

66,i 287 And so, in turn, he says in another passage, “Why hast thou for¬ 
saken me?” and here he says, "I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee.” 288 
For < his > body needed to spend the three days in the grave in order to 
fulfill the sayings, “And I was free among the dead” 289 and “They cast me, 
the beloved, out like a loathed carcass.” 290 This was also in fulfillment 
of “Thou shalt not suffer thine holy one to see corruption,” 291 (to show 
his holiness through his body), and < “Thou shalt not leave my soul in 
Hades” >, (to show that his soul was not left in hades either). (2) For the 
divine Word was in it throughout his sojourn in Hades, in fulfillment of 
the apostle’s saying, “It was impossible for him to be holden of hades.” 292 
66,3 And why does scripture say, “impossible,” except that Death and 
Hades was eager to detain a soul but that, because of his Godhead, it was 
impossible for his soul to be detained? But if his soul could not be detained 
because of his Godhead, how could, “My God, my God, why hast thou for¬ 
saken me?” 293 be said in the person of his Godhead? (4) This saying was 
given in the person of the manhood, in terms of human frailty, to teach us 
that Christ was incarnate truly, and not in seeming or appearance. 

,5 But what arose from the earth, other than the body that had fallen 
asleep? “He is risen,” says the scripture, “he is not here.” 294 And what was 
it that had arisen except a body? It was a body, then, that was in the grave, 
but the soul had departed with the divine Word. (6) And again, Christ 
accomplished his perfect resurrection all together, in the same Godhead, 
the same soul, the same holy body, and then united his whole self in one 
spiritual union—one union of Godhead, one provision, one fullness. In 
the ninety-second Psalm it says, “The Lord hath reigned, he hath put on 
comeliness,” 295 meaning the divine Word’s entry from the heavens into 
the world having put on comeliness, that is, with the flesh that was born 
of a Virgin. 

,6 For since he seemed of little account to his unbelieving beholders 
comeliness was ascribed to him to show his power which, through the 
seeming weakness of the flesh, overcame the arbiter < of death. For he 
arose* > after abolishing < the curse* > of sin—that is, death—and after, 
in a comely fashion, accomplishing the entire provision for our salvation, 
after doing away with corruption and the curse, annulling the writ against 
us and the covenant with Hades, and making all the provisions for the sal¬ 
vation of humankind. (7) For directly after it says, “The Lord hath reigned, 
he hath put on comeliness,” the scripture makes a further addition and 
repeats it, saying, “The Lord hath put on, and hath been girded about, with 
strength.” 296 This is to show that his first garment came from Mary, but 
that his further clothing the second time came from the resurrection of 
the dead; (8) for as the sacred scripture has said, he is “the firstborn from 
the dead.” 297 This is why he adds a further assurance by this second don¬ 
ning of a garment and says, “The Lord hath put on, and hath been girded 
about, with strength.” 
,1 For as a person with his waist belted tightens his garment about 
his loins, making his appearance trimmer and bringing the garment close 
to his own skin, so Christ “girded on comeliness” for the first time because 
of his sojourn here in the flesh. But the second time he “put on strength,” 
as the scripture says, by rising from the dead. His manhood is no longer 
subject to suffering, no longer subject to scourging, can no longer be cru¬ 
cified, as the apostle said of him, “He is risen, he dieth no more, death 
hath no more dominion over him.” 298 (2) This is why it says, “He was 
girded”—[that is], by uniting his flesh with one Godhead, a single one¬ 
ness, < one > spirit, the divine and the bodily one as a spiritual whole, 
indissoluble. Thus, then, he entered where doors were barred, < proving > 
his grossness ethereal and his passibility impassible, for he had suffered 
in the flesh while retaining his impassibility. (3) [Even so] after entering 
he displayed bones and flesh, the mark of the lance and the marks of the 
nails, was felt by Thomas and seen by the disciples. But he entered where 
doors were barred to show that, for us men, he had made one spiritual 
unity of the whole of his saving work. 

67,4 And why do I tire myself with so much talk? To say “the same 
things” often “is not grievous to me, but” for my readers < “it is safe.” 299 
Therefore* >, since 1 have often thought of < the same thing* > for your 
safety 1 have put it down as a way of getting through the savage attack of 
Arius’ thoughts, words and suppositions. 

,1 And now that 1 have likewise discussed this expression sufficiently, 
let me go on to the rest in order, by fully explaining most of their foolish¬ 
ness that comes to my mind, to show, from a few texts or even more, that 
for one who has the Holy Spirit and has received a sober mind from the 
Lord, nothing crooked can be suspected anywhere in the sacred scripture, 
and no sort of frailty in the Father, the Son or the Holy Spirit. (2) Everything 
has been said, in truth, in the sacred scripture, with entire perfection and 
with provision for every need and for what is required in every passage, by 
the Lord himself and his holy apostles and prophets whom he has sent. 

68,3 For indeed, the Lord made a prophesy of this when he said, “Eli, 
Eli, lema sabachthani” in Hebrew. The Lord, come to the cross, was duly 
finishing the saying by saying what had been prophesied of him, “Eli, Eli,” 
in Hebrew as it had already been written; and [then], in adding the com¬ 
panion phrase he said, “lema sabachthani,” no longer in Hebrew but in 
Aramaic, so as to begin as it had been written of him but in going on 
change the rest of the line to another language. (4) This too he was doing 
to make a good provision. By saying, “Eli, Eli,” he meant to acknowledge 
that the words had been spoken of him by the prophet. But by saying 
the rest no longer in I lebrew but in Aramaic, he meant to humble < the 
pride > of those who boast of I lebrew, and to declare that other languages 
too are fit for the fulfillment of the oracles about him. (5) For he was now 
to extend the knowledge of himself to all nations, not just the Hebrews, 
as this whole series [of expressions] in the twenty-first Psalm 300 indicates 
when, in the person of his human nature, it records all the frailty of his 
humanity. 

68,6 But, come [to the cross], he was completely fulfilling the descrip¬ 
tion himself, just as < every point > in the whole of the psalm, one after 
another, corresponds with the humanity of Christ which it is describing, 
ft says, “And they parted my garments,” 301 and, “They pierced my hands 
and my feet, they stared and looked upon me.” 302 And as many other such 
things are said, which cannot possibly apply to his Godhead, but are said 
in the flesh—although the Godhead, impassibly and in truth, has made 
provision of them all. 

6g,i But they leap up again, like mad dogs in the grip of some frenzy 
which, because of their frenzy, do not know their master and attack him 
first. When we tell them truly that the Lord in the Gospel said of his disci¬ 
ples, “Those whom thou hast given me, Father, 1 have kept in the world,” 303 
(2) and again, “Make them to be one in me, as 1 and thou are one,” 304 they 
reply, “Can’t you see that in the words, ‘I am in the Father and the Father 
in me, and we two are one?’ 305 he is not speaking of equality but of con¬ 
cord? (3) How could the disciples be in him by equality? But they could 
be in him by concord.” 

And God’s truth refutes them completely at once, since the disciples 
could not do this, and it could not be said of them, if the Word had not 
come and shared their flesh, and united them in him for adoption as sons. 
(4) Thus everywhere in the Song of Songs, he calls his holy church “neigh¬ 
bor,” addresses her with his holy voice of arousal and admonition, and 

says, “Rise up and come, my neighbor, my fair one, my dove!” 306 (5) And 
do you see how he calls her “neighbor?” But the church could not be 
called Christ’s “neighbor” if he had not come from above and drawn near 
to her, through the flesh with frailties like hers which he had taken, so as 
to gather those who had obediently drawn near him and call the human¬ 
ity which had become near to him his holy and spotless bride. 

69,6 And this is why the Word, our Lord the Only-begotten, here prays 
the Father that his disciples may be in him, so that, when the disciples 
have been sanctified, he may join the kinship with him through the flesh 
which has become theirs by the Father’s good pleasure, into a oneness 
of good will and adoption and, in the Father’s Firstborn, they may have 
“enrollment with the firstborn in heaven.” 307 (7) And lest anyone suppose 
that the Son has been changed from his Father’s glory by donning the 
flesh, to confirm their faith and knowledge of his truth, so that < no one > 
becomes suspicious of his servants and is deprived of his hope, he says, 
“that as I and thou are one, so these may be one. (8) For I and thou are 
one” 308 —since < he is > God of God, and co-essential [with the Father] 
in Godhead. 

6g.g And “We are one,” is not indicative of a unit. He did not say, 
“I am one,” but, “I and thou.” And “We are one” is said to confound Sabel- 
lius and his school, since Sabellius thinks that the Son and the Father are 
an identity and the Father and the Holy Spirit likewise. For that is why he 
said, “We are one,” and did not say, “I am one.” There are two Perfects, a 
Father and a Son, but one because of equality, by their < one > Godhead, 
one power and one likeness, (ro) In the Godhead the Father and Son are 
one, in the manhood the Son and the disciples are one, brought to one 
union of adoption by his deigning to call the disciples to the ineffability 
of his lovingkindness. And once again there has been a refutation of those 
who in vain think wrongly of their Master. 

70,1 But let me pass this text by too and examine the rest. Since they 
spend their time on syllogisms and nonsensical reasonings and, although 
they are men, try to out-argue God, the sophists, when they discover one 
text or another, jump right up. The prophet reproved them by saying, 
“Will someone trip God because you can trip me?” 309 
,2 Well, what do the great guys have to say now? The same talk¬ 
ing point which I explained earlier they [now] direct at me in the form 
of a query, “Did God beget the Son by willing it or without willing it?” 310 
I have shown that to God there is no future, (3) but that in him all things 
are complete at once. He does not will a thing first before doing it; nor 
does he do it without willing it or will a thing in preparation for it, and 
his preparation does not require will. (4) Thus with him his Offspring is 
always begotten with no beginning in time. It is always with the Father as 
an Offspring begotten, and never ceases to be such. Since I have repeated 
the argument here, I again make the statement that the Father did not 
beget the Son either by willing it or without willing it, but in his nature 
which transcends will. For the Son is < the offspring > of a nature beyond 
will and above all conception and supposition. 

71,1 But these latter day disciples of Aristotle, as I said, invent another 
argument similar to this one. For they have imitated Aristotle’s poison 
and abandoned the harmlessness and meekness of the Holy Spirit, as the 
Lord says, “Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find 
rest for your souls.” 311 (2) But these people have abandoned meekness and 
gone in for cleverness instead, taking up Aristotle and the other secular 
dialecticians. Contentious as they are, they go after the fruits of dialecti¬ 
cians but know no fruit of righteousness and have not been privileged to 
have the gift of the Holy Spirit within them. 

,3 Now here is what they say to us, when we tell them that the Son 
Who Is was with the Father Who Is—since the Father said to Moses, 
“Thou shalt say unto them, He Who Is hath sent me,” 312 and again, the 
Gospel says of the Son that “In the beginning was the Word, and the Word 
was with God, and the Word was God.” 313 If we tell them that He Who Is 
was with Him Who Is, they ask us, “Well now, was that which is begotten, 
or that which isn’t? If he ‘was,’ why was he begotten? But if he was begot¬ 
ten, how come he ‘was?’ ” 

,4 And < this > is the product of the same foolishness which is pre¬ 
occupied with philosophical questions, has its head in the clouds, “med¬ 
dles with things in the heavens, and does no good.” 314 
For we shall ask them, “What gave you this idea of thinking these 
things?” (5) But if they tell us, “Our mind requires us to examine them,” 
we for our part shall say, “All right, you people, tell us, are you reasoning 
about your own affairs, or about God’s?” 

Then they say, “We’re reasoning about God’s on our own initiative, as 
rational beings.” 

“Well, isn’t God different from your condition, nature and essence?” 

“Yes,” they reply. 

“Well, if God’s nature is different from yours, then in the first place your 
nature can’t comprehend things about God that are incomprehensible. 
And in the second, it is an impiety to model God on yourselves, in terms 
of your own essence.” 

71,6 For in our own case, something that does not exist is begotten 
[and then it exists]. For at one time we did not exist, but we were begot¬ 
ten by our fathers, who at one time did not exist either; and so it must be 
understood from the beginning, back to Adam. But Adam was made from 
the earth, and at one time earth did not exist. But the earth was made 
from nothing, since it did not always exist. 

But God was always a Father. 315 And whatever he was by nature, so he 
has begotten the Son. (7) He begot him as an everlasting [Son]—not as a 
brother to him but begotten of him, his like in nature—Lord of Lord, God 
of God, very God of very God. And whatever one concludes of the Father, 
so he must conclude of the Son; whatever he believes of the Son he must 
< also > hold of the Father. (8) For [the Son] says, “He that believeth not 
on the Son as he believeth on the Father, and honoreth < not > the Son as 
he honoreth the Father, the wrath of God abideth on him,” 316 as we find 
in the Gospel. 

And their idea of logic has failed in its turn. (9) For God, who is incom¬ 
prehensible, has begotten incomprehensible God, before the ages and 
before time. And there is no interval between Son and Father; in perceiv¬ 
ing a Father you simultaneously perceive a Son, and in naming a Son you 
simultaneously indicate a Father. For Son is perceived from the Father 
and Father is known from a Son. (10) How can there be Son if he has 
no Father? And how can there be a Father if he did not beget the Only- 
begotten? When can the Father not be called “Father,” or the Son not be 
called “Son”—so that people can perceive a Father who was without a 

son and later, as though he had managed an improvement, begot a son 
so that, after the begetting, the Father could be be called Father, with the 
perfect God who needs no improvement improving in Godhead? 

72,1 Since they want to reject this curative drug and health-giving 
antidote, the foundation of the faith of God’s holy church, they make 
one more pretense and say, “Why the term, ‘essence?’ Why is the Son 
called “co-essential” with the Father? Which scripture has spoken of 
co-essentiality? Which apostle said anything about an ‘essence’ of God?” 

But they do not know that “being” (u7r6oracng) and “essence” mean 
the same thing. (2) Christ is Lord in his “being,” and “the brightness of 
the Father’s glory and the express image of his being.” 317 Thus he is [the 
Father’s] essence—not an extraneous addition (7repioua(a) to it but this 
existent thing itself (auxo touto to ov), as Moses said when he spoke to 
the children of Israel, “He Who Is hath sent me.” 318 “He Who Is” is that 
which is, but that which is is the existent essence. (3) On the other hand, 
“co-essential” does not mean “one” but by the “co” indicates two perfect 
entities. Yet the two do not differ from each other, nor are they different 
from their oneness. But if we have employed an < unscriptural > expres¬ 
sion from motives of piety, to pin the truth down—(there can be no ref¬ 
utation whatever of heresy without the confession of the homoousion. 

(4) As a snake hates the smell of pitch, the exhalation of hartshorn, the 
odor of lignite and the incense of storax, so do Arius and Sabellius hate 
the statement of the true confession of the homoousion.) [But even if 
we have employed such an expression] we shall tell them all the same, 

(5) “Even though the expression is not in the sacred scriptures—indeed, 
it is plainly implied in the Law and by the Apostles and the Prophets, for 
‘By two or three witnesses shall every word be established’ 319 —it is still 
permissible for us to employ a useful expression for piety’s sake, to safe¬ 
guard the holy faith.” 

72,6 “But what do you mean, you people? Tell us, folks, what are you 
saying about the Father? Is the Father uncreated?” Of course they’ll say 
yes. Who is so < silly >as to doubt this? What sort of nut would sup¬ 
pose that the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ is not uncreated? 
You yourselves must surely admit that he is unbegotten, uncreated, and 

unoriginate. For he has no Father before him nor any limit to his years, 
nor any “beginning of days,” 320 as the scripture says. 

72,7 “Thus, if he has no beginning of time or end of time, it is agreed 
and unquestionable that he is uncreated—but nowhere does scripture 
say this of him. 321 But even if it is not scriptural we are obliged, for piety’s 
sake, reverently to think and say this of him. (8) In the same way, even if 
it were not scriptural we would be compelled to speak of “homoousion” 
in our own language as an abbreviation—even though this might seem 
beyond us, and the discussion of God might appear to be beyond our 
powers, (g) But may the Lord himself pardon-not wishing to defend the 
Godhead which has no need of our support, but we must speak with piety 
and think with piety, or we perish. 

73, r “Well then, disciples of Arius, give us an answer! We all agree in 
saying that the Father is unbegotten and uncreated, and the expression 
is plainly a wonderful one. Where is it in scripture then? Show us the 
place! The Law has not said it, nor the prophets, nor a Gospel, nor the 
apostles. Thus if we may use an unscriptural expression with piety, and 
it is allowable when said for the glory of God, who can accuse us even 
if the homoousion were not in the scriptures, (2) since we have found 
a word with which we can confess the certainty of our salvation?” But 
there are texts [which, confirm the homoousion when] used with the 
help of pious reasoning, the ones I have listed above 322 and many others. 
I shall also pass this expression by, however, and with God’s help tear 
open their other expressions and devices to which they have given voice 
for the entrapment of the innocent. 

74, r The same people say further, along with all the texts which, by bad 
guesswork, they debase from the Gospel and the Apostle: “As the apostle 
says next, and as it is found in the Epistle to the Corinthians, in the chap¬ 
ter on resurrection, (2) ‘Then cometh the end, when he shall have deliv¬ 
ered the kingdom to God and his Father, when he shall have put down 
all rule and authority and power. For he must reign until he hath put 
all his enemies under his feet. The last enemy that shall be destroyed is 
death. Now when he saith that all things are in subjection under him, it is 

manifest that he is excepted that hath put all things in subjection under 
him. (3) Now when all things are put in subjection under him, then shall 
the Son himself be subject to him that hath put all things under him, that 
God may be all in all.’ ” 323 

74,4 They seize on this passage, and with their customary hostility 
toward the Only-begotten take his ineffable, glorious Godhead away and 
say—foolishly, as I have often remarked—“You see that he says, ‘Then 
cometh the end, when he shall have delivered the kingdom to God and 
his Father, when he shall have put down < every rule and > all authority 
and power. For he must reign, until he hath put all his enemies under his 
feet.’ (5) But ‘must,’ ‘until,’ and, ‘when he shall deliver the kingdom,’ are 
the setting of a time.” And they blasphemously say that these are indica¬ 
tions of the cessation and deposition of the one who is reigning < for he 
remains* > [in power only] until he delivers the kingdom to God and his 
Father. 

74,6 And they do not know the sense of the truth to begin with. 
Because of the partaking of our flesh and blood by the Only-begotten 
his human frailties are dwelt on and mentioned in connection with his 
human nature, in addition to his glory—but not without his ever perfect 
and glorious Godhead which needs no enhancement of its glory but pos¬ 
sesses glorification in itself and is perfection itself. (7) He himself gives an 
account of the two natures by saying of the more recent one, “Glorify thou 
me, Father, with the glory that 1 had with thee before the world was.” 324 
But when the Father proclaims the glory of the two natures, he says spiri¬ 
tually of the first, “1 have glorified it,” to show its infinity; but he says, “And 
1 will glorify it again,” 325 of the newer nature because of the incarnation. 

75,1 Now for the clarification, even here, of the things the apostle said 
when he set the truth about Christ down in two ways < and wrote “Son” 
because of his divine nature* >, and “until he shall deliver the kingdom 
unto God and his Father” because of his human nature’s beginning in 
time. For the divinity of the Only-begotten was always with the Father— 
that is, the only-begotten divine Word who has proceeded from the Father 
without beginning and not in time. (2) Otherwise where is the fulfillment 
of the angel’s words, “The Spirit of the Lord shall come upon thee and 
the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee?” 326 For he said, “Thou 

shalt bear a son and shalt call his name Jesus” 327 to Mary, to show that 
the divine Word had descended from on high, had taken flesh in this vir¬ 
gin’s womb and perfectly become man. (3) < And > so as not to separate 
his human perfection from his divine perfection he and told her with the 
addition of the word, “also,” “Therefore also that which shall be born of 
thee shall be called holy, the Son of God.” 328 

Then < he says >, “God will give unto him the throne of his father David, 
and he shall reign over the house of Jacob unto the ages, and of his king¬ 
dom there shall be no end.” 329 (4) Now what should those who do not 
know the life-giving scripture say, given that each of these is the opposite 
of the other—“He must reign until [some time]” and “He shall reign over 
the house of Jacob unto the ages,” (and he did not say merely, “unto the 
age,” but, “unto the ages.”)? And again, “when he shall have delivered the 
kingdom unto God and his Father,” standing in contrast with “and of his 
kingdom there shall be no end.” And yet both have said such things of the 
Lord and Christ < and > both are entirely trustworthy—the angel Gabriel 
is a holy being and the holy apostle inspired—(5) can the scripture, which 
is always truthful in all things, contradict itself? Never think it! 

But as I said at the outset, because of the implications of the manhood 
Christ possesses all its natural accompaniments. (6) For if he ever hands 
his rule over to anyone, then he is not ruling now. But if he is not yet 
ruling, why is it that he is worshiped continually by the angels and arch¬ 
angels, before and during his advent in the flesh, as the scripture says of 
him, “When he bringeth the first begotten into the world, it saith, angels 
of God worship him.” 330 And again, “He sat down at the right hand of 
the Father.” 331 And again, “Unto him every knee shall bow, of things in 
heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth.” 332 

75,7 Thus he who is worshiped < by > all, always rules. What shall we 
say then, since the Son who rules always-from the beginning, now and 
forever—has not yet handed the rule over to the Father? (8) Is the Father 
excluded from his rule? Never think it! The Son is ruling together with the 
Father, and the Father with the Son and the Holy Spirit. 

But what are they saying? ‘“When he delivereth the kingdom to God 
and his Father does he himself cease to rule?’ ” Never think it! (g) Where 
is the application of, “Of his kingdom there shall be no end.” 333 [He shall 
deliver the kingdom” is said] to show that nothing which has been found 
or is to be found in the Son opposes or differs from the unity of the Father, 
and from < the > one will of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit. (10) 
For even here we see that ‘When he shall have delivered the kingdom to 
God and his Father, when he shall have put down all rule and authority 
and power” 334 is said of the Son in the sense of the Son himself delivering 
the kingdom, and putting down all rule and so on. And “He must reign 
until he hath put all his enemies under his feet” 335 is said of the Son doing 
all things, possessing all sovereignty and authority, and with the kingdom 
delivering his subjects to the Father. 

,1 Then next he again switches to another person, that of the Father 
in turn, subjecting all things to the Son, and says, “He hath put all things 
in subjection under his feet. The last enemy that shall be destroyed is 
death.” 336 But he is no longer speaking only in the person of the Father 
or only in the person of the Son, but right in between the persons of the 
Father and the Son, and he says, “The last enemy that shall be destroyed 
is death.” 

,2 “But when he saith that all things have been put under him,” < and 
so on >. If I could only ask them in whose person that “He saith” is said! 
For the profundity of God’s mysteries judges the fleshly spiritually. “The 
fleshly man receiveth not the things of the Spirit, for they are foolishness 
unto him.” 337 (3) For here, if the Father is speaking to the Son, the action 
is defective; the Son made things subject to the Father. But if “when he 
saith < that > all things are put in subjection under him” is said in the per¬ 
son of the Son, the thought is unsatisfactory because it assumes futurity in 
God, either in the Father or in the Son. 

76,4 But who is it that is saying that all things have been made subject? 
For it has not said, “when they say”; if it had said, “when they say,” it could 
apply either to the angels or to the subjects. (5) But since it has previously 
shown the Son subjecting all things and handing them over to the Father, 
and the Father subjecting all things to the Son, careful exegetes are left 

with the person of the Holy Spirit. And therefore, after the person of the 
Father and the person of the Son, the scripture has unequivocally given 
an intimation of the person of the Holy Spirit who always declares and 
teaches the truths about the Father and the Son—to keep the full knowl¬ 
edge of the Trinity, and of the additional glory of [Christ’s] human nature, 
from being defectively stated. (6) Then he says, “The last enemy that shall 
be destroyed is death.” But one who is destroyed has been curbed and can 
no longer do what he does, or even exist; he has been destroyed. 

77,1 Well, what have those who have no knowledge of the scriptures 
to say about this? “If this is what the text said, we must suppose that the 
Son will cease to rule.” 

But [if we say this] we shall commit an impiety and < venture > to rank 
him with God’s subjects, particularly after he ceases to do what he has 
been doing. (2) Perish the thought! No one who believes and truly hopes 
in Christ will think of saying or hearing anything unbecoming his glory, 
as the Arians futilely think that they can. The sacred scripture teaches 
everything < by saying >, “When he saith, All things are put in subjection 
under him, it is manifest that he is excepted who hath put all things in 
subjection under him. But when all things are put in subjection under 
him, then shall also the Son himself be subject unto him that hath put all 
things under him.” 338 

77,3 This means that the statement that was originally made by the 
angel, linked [with it] by the similarity of the expression, fittingly and 
with perfect clarity reveals the statement’s whole meaning. The angel 
said a similar thing, mentioning the Son to begin with and then with an 
addition which referred to the human nature, showing the union [of the 
natures]: “Therefore that which is born of thee shall also be called holy, 
the Son of God.” 339 (4) For this and similar reasons, “because that which 
shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God,” “the Son himself 
will be subject to him that hath put all things under him” so that Christ’s 
flesh will no longer be fleshly in power but united in [one union with the 
Godhead], and reign with the Father and Holy Spirit, “of whose kingdom 
there shall be no end.” 340 

77,5 And it is since he has risen that “that God may be all in all” 341 has 
had its inception, for his flesh has been spiritually united with his one 

Godhead. But since he says, “Do this in remembrance of me until the com¬ 
ing of the Son of Man,” 342 and “Ye shall see him in like manner as ye 
have seen him taken up—” 343 then finally, when all things have been ful¬ 
filled and nothing left unfulfilled of those things < that are to be > brought 
back 344 to his Godhead, the prophecy, “that God may be all in all” < will 
come true* >. 

77,6 < But > the text says, < “God,” > 345 so that there may be no distinc¬ 
tion [between the manhood and the Godhead]. For there is no distinc¬ 
tion, to make polytheism impossible, for there is one glory. For the Son is 
not now out of the Father’s control, like a warlord, or under his control 
like a slave with no freedom of action: [he is] < the One > begotten of the 
Father, of the same nature and the same Godhead. Nor will he be subject 
to the Father then from defect or inferiority, or by compulsion or ces¬ 
sation [of rule], (7) but as a true only-begotten Son who rules with the 
Father forever, and who both elevates the whole creation to a single one¬ 
ness and honorable reward and teaches this to his holy church, “so that 
God may be all in all.” 346 For there is one Godhead, one sovereignty and 
one glory of Father, Son and Holy Spirit, with the Father fittingly honored 
by the Son as a true son, and by the Holy Spirit as not different from the 
Father and the Son. (8) And let this exclude even the words of those who 
blaspheme God’s Son and Holy Spirit, and the thoughts of their enmity to 
the Son and the Holy Spirit. And once more we have detected their evil 
devices and thwarted them. 

78,1 Once more they select certain expressions from the Gospel and say, 
“Why can ‘The Son do nothing of himself, but what he seeth the Father 
do?’ ” 347 And they do not understand what is said at the beginning [of the 
scripture]; although it was surely the Father, he did not create something 
first, and the Son manufacture something afterwards. (2) Which heaven 
did the Father make all by himself, for the Son to take the example of the 
first heaven as his model, and manufacture something like it? 

But none of the inventors of evil can prove this. “In the beginning God 
created the heaven and the earth,” 348 but he says at the same time, in the 

beginning at the creation, “Let us make man in our image and after our 
likeness.” 349 And he didn’t say, “Come here and I’ll show you how to do 
it.” (3) And then it says, “And God made the man,” 350 and it didn’t say, 
“God made him and showed the Son how to make the man.” The Son was 
no ignoramus, that he needed to learn a trade first and then put it into 
practice. 

,4 But when our Lord had come in his turn, put on flesh, become 
man and lived in our midst, he conversed with the Jews who thought that 
he was abolishing the Father’s commandments and, desiring to elevate 
their minds, so that they would not attend to his manhood alone, said, 
“The Son doeth naught but that which he seeth the Father do.” His intent 
was to show that the work of the Son is the work of the Father, and that 
the Father is pleased with the Son’s execution of all his work. 

,5 And they will also be harried like this < about > each of the other 
texts in its turn, when they blunder into them like beasts and are con¬ 
founded by the lightning flash of the Word, the truth. “Flash thy lightning 
and scatter them, send forth thine arrows and confound them.” 351 (79,1) 
For we have to deal with the following text, which they select next and 
quote from the Gospel, “For the Father loveth the Son and showeth him 
all that he doeth, and greater works than these shall he show him, that ye 
may marvel”; 352 and again, “The Father raiseth the dead and giveth them 
life. Likewise also doth the Son give life to whom he will”; 353 and further, 
“The Father judgeth no man but hath given all judgment to the Son, that 
all may honor the Son as they honor the Father.” 354 (2) But take note, 
Arius, at the end of my debate with you, of the conclusion to which the 
discourse has come. Christ did not say, “that some may say yes and some 
say no,” but, “that all may honor the Son as they honor the Father.” Stop 
dishonoring the Son, then, so as not to dishonor the Father! If you choose 
to ascribe an inferiority in the Son or suppose some defect in him, does 
the supposition not extend to the Father as well? For it is part of your 
impudence that you think < meanly > of the Son, and do not honor him 
as you honor the Father. 

,3 Why, indeed, does the Father also give him [this]? Tell me what 
he says, wonder man! “That the Son may give life to whom he will”—he 
didn’t say, “to whom he is told.” There were two particular reasons why 
the Son needed to receive all this from the Father, though not to be less 
than the Father. (4) First, it was to direct our minds upward to a single 
oneness of Godhead, the Father, the Son and the ffoly Spirit, and not to 
lower the human reason to divisions and a multiplicity of gods, but to 
raise it to a single oneness. But second, it was for the transformation of the 
glory of Christ’s human nature and its union with his Godhead. 

79,5 For since he came to gladden his disciples with the promise he 
gave, “There be some standing here that will not taste death till they have 
seen the Son of Man coming in his glory,” 355 “and on the eighth day,” 356 
as the Gospel says—(6) or, as the other says, “after six days.” 357 For the 
evangelists do not say some things in place of others but, although there 
is one exact truth, it is constantly safeguarded so that people will have no 
excuse to stumble at the essentials, since “The mind of man is continually 
bent on evil from his youth.” 358 (7) This is the reason why one evangelist 
said, “on the eighth day.” Part of the day on which the Savior said this was 
left over, and the evangelist counted from that day and hour—if the day 
was declining, about the ninth hour or the tenth. And again, since the 
thing was done at about the third or fourth hour of the eighth day, this 
day was called the eighth. (8) But the other evangelist provides a safe¬ 
guard and says, “after six days.” He did not count on the day when the 
Savior said the word to the disciples, or the day on which he did the work, 
but the six full days in between. 

80,1 But since I have come to the discussion of the saying, I shall give 
the explanation. “He took Peter and James and John and brought them 
into the mount, and was transfigured, and his countenance shone as the 
sun”—his countenance in the flesh united with his Godhead—and “his 
raiment shone white as snow.” 359 Plainly, this means the flesh taken from 
Mary, which was of our stock. (2) And it was changed to glory, the added 
glory of the Godhead, the honor, perfection and heavenly glory which his 
flesh did not have at the beginning, but which it < was > receiving here in 
its union with the divine Word. 

80,3 In this way understand the words we quoted earlier, “He hath 
given all judgment to the Son” 360 —because he has given him authority 
“to give life to whom he will”— 361 as proof, first of all, of the unity of the 
divine nature, and of its one will which ascribes the whole of goodness 
to the Father and to one First Principle and Godhead. For there are three 
perfect entities but one Godhead, the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit; 
and in its turn the human nature [of Christ] which, along with the divine 
nature, receives the gift, authority and perfection of rank which is granted 
it by the Father and the Son, and which < has been united > in a single 
spiritual oneness of Godhead. 

81,1 And we have barely managed to get past this stormy place and 
through this whole attack by savage beasts—the wild heaving of the bil¬ 
lows and the fearful foaming of the seas. Because, in my inadequacy, I 
received the power and the grace from God, I have burned my opponents’ 
spears and shields thanks to the right reasoning in my mind, have broken 
the bows of the opposition, < and have been victorious* > over this ser¬ 
pent, the many-headed ugliness of the hydra, (2) so that I can sing < the > 
song of triumph in God, “Let us sing to the Lord, for he is gloriously magni¬ 
fied; horse and rider hath he hurled into the sea.” 362 

I have broken the dragon’s head above “the water that goes softly,” of 
which these present day fellow heirs with the Jews would have no part. The 
prophet had them in mind when he said, (3) “Because ye refuse the water 
of Siloam that goeth softly, and prefer to have the king Rezin and Tabeel 
the son of Remaliah, behold, the Lord bringeth upon you the mighty water 
of the river, the king of Assyria,” 363 and so on. (4) But we have received 
help in the Lord, the “saliva spat on the ground” by his true flesh, and 
with the spittle have received “the clay” smeared “on our eyes,” 364 so that 
we who were once in ignorance now know the truth, and have gone and 
washed in “Siloam,” which means “the Sent.” 365 That is, [we have washed] 
in his human nature and perfect Godhead, and since we now see we no 
longer deny the Lord, even though the partisans of Arius and successors 
of the Jews cast us out of the synagogue. (5) For like the Jews, the Arians 
have agreed that whoever confesses the Lord must “be cast out of the 

synagogue,” 366 showing that one who has recovered his sight is a reproach 
to those who cannot see. For if their synagogue were not all blind, they 
would not eject someone whose eyes had been opened. 

,6 Let us thank the Lord, then, that we have recovered our sight and 
confess the Lord and, if we perform the work of the commandments, have 
healed our hurts; and that we have trod upon the serpent and broken the 
head of the dragon by the power of God, to whom be glory, honor and 
might, the Father in the Son, and the Son in the Father with the Holy 
Spirit, unto the ages of ages. Amen. 

,7 But leaving this hydra we have slain, with its seven heads and 
many segments, let us go on to the rest as usual, beloved, calling on God, 
our constant help, to take the same care of us and of any who desire to 
read this work, for the cure of those who have been bitten, and the cor¬ 
rection of those who have already joined the ranks of the evil. 