

1,1 Arius and the Arians who derive from him came directly after this 
time of Melitius and St. Peter the bishop of Alexandria. Arius flourished 
during the episcopate of Peter’s successor, the holy bishop Alexander, 
who deposed him amid much turmoil and with a great council. For Alex¬ 
ander removed him from office and expelled him from the church and 
the city, as a great evil which had come to the world. (2) They say that 
Arius was Libyan, but that he had become a presbyter in Alexandria. He 
presided over the church called the Church of Baucalis. All the catholic 
churches in Alexandria < are > under one archbishop, and presbyters have 
been assigned to each particular church to meet the ecclesiastical needs 
of the residents whose < homes are* > near each church. These are also 
called quarters and lanes by the inhabitants of Alexandria. 

1,3 Arius was born during the reign of the great and blessed emperor 
Constantine, the son of Constantius in his old age. Constantius was the 
son of the emperor Valerian, < who > himself had ruled jointly with 
Diocletian, Maximian and the others. (4) Everyone knows that Constan¬ 
tine, the father of Constantius, Constans and Crispus, was admirable in 
the practice of Christianity and the apostolic and prophetic faith of the 
fathers, which had not been adulterated in the holy churches until the 
time of Arius himself. But Arius managed to detach a large number [from 
the church.] 

,1 A spirit of Satan, as scripture says, entered this Arius who was 
Alexander’s presbyter, and incited him to stir up the dust against the 
church—< just as > no small fire was lit from him, and it caught on nearly 
the whole Roman realm, especially the east. Even today his sect has not 
stopped battling against the true faith. 

,2 But at that time Arius was to all appearances a presbyter, and 
there were many fellow presbyters of his in each church. (There are many 
churches in Alexandria, including the recently built Caesarium, as it is 
called, which was originally the Adrianum and later became the Licinian 
gymnasium or palace. (3) But later, in Constantius’ time, it was decided 
to rebuild it as a church. Gregory the son of Melitian, and Arian, began 
it, and the blessed Athanasius, the father of orthodoxy, finished it. It was 
burned in Julian’s time, and rebuilt by the blessed bishop Athanasius him¬ 
self. (4) But as I said there are many others, the one called the Church of 
Dionysius, and those of Theonas, Pierius, Serapion, Persaea, Dizya, Men- 
didius, Ammianus, and the church Baucalis and others.) 

2,5 A presbyter named Colluthus served in one of these, Carpones in 
another, Sarmatas in another, and the aforesaid Arius, who was in charge 
of one of these churches. (6) It is plain that each of these caused some dis¬ 
cord among the laity by his expositions, when, at the regular services, he 
taught the people entrusted to his care. Some were inclined to Arius, but 
others to Colluthus, others to Carpones, others to Sarmatas. Since each of 
them expounded the scripture differently in his own church, from their 
preference and high regard for their own presbyter some people called 
themselves Colluthians, and others called themselves Arians. (7) And in 
fact Colluthus < too > taught some perversions, but his sect did not survive 
and was scattered immediately. And if only this were also true of Arius’ 
insane faith, or better, unfaith—or better, wicked faith! 

3,1 For in his later years he was inspired by vanity to depart from the 
prescribed path. He was unusually tall, wore a downcast expression and 
was got up like a guileful serpent, able to steal every innocent heart by his 
villainous outer show. For he always wore a short cloak and a dalmatic 2 
was pleasant in his speech, and was constantly winning souls round by 
flattery. (2) For example, what did he do but lure all of seventy virgins 
away from the church at one time! And the word is that he drew seven 
presbyters away, and twelve deacons. 3 And his plague immediately spread 
to bishops, for he convinced Secundus of Pentapolis and others to be car¬ 
ried away with him. (3) But all this went on in the church without the 
knowledge of the blessed Alexander, the bishop, until Melitius, the bishop 
of Egypt from the Thebaid whom I mentioned, who was regarded as an 
archbishop himself—the affair of Melitius had not yet reached the point 
of wicked enmity. (4) Moved by zeal, then—he did not differ in faith, 
only in his show of would-be righteousness, < because of > which he did 
the world great harm himself, as I have explained. Well then, Melitius, the 
archbishop in Egypt but supposed to be under Alexander’s jurisdiction, 
brought this to the attention of the archbishop Alexander. As I have said, 
Melitius was contemporary with the blessed bishop and martyr Peter. 

3,5 When Melitius had given all this information about Arius—how 
he had departed from the truth, had defiled and ruined many, and had 
gradually weaned his converts away from the right faith—the bishop sent 
for Arius himself and asked whether what he had been told about him was 
true. (6) Arius showed neither hesitancy nor fear but brazenly coughed 
his whole heresy up from the first—as his letters show and the inves¬ 
tigation of him at the time. (7) And so Alexander called the presbytery 
together, and certain other bishops who were there [at the time], and held 
an examination and interrogation of Arius. But since he would not obey 
the truth Alexander expelled him and declared him outcast in the city. 
But the virgins we spoke of were drawn away from the faith with him, and 
the clergy we mentioned, and a great throng of others. 
,1 But though Arius stayed in the city for a long time, the confes¬ 
sor and martyr Melitius immediately died. Arius, then, destroyed many 
by instigating schisms and leading everyone astray. Later though, since 
he had been discovered and exposed in the city and excommunicated, 
he fled from Alexandria and made < his > way to Palestine. (2) And on 
his arrival he approached each bishop with fawning and flattery in the 
hope of gaining many supporters. And some received him, while others 
rebuffed him. 

4,3 Afterwards this came to the ears of the bishop Alexander, and 
he wrote encyclical letters to each bishop which are still preserved by 
the scholarly, about seventy in all. He wrote at once to Eusebius in Cae¬ 
sarea—he was alive—and to Macarius of Jerusalem, Asclepius in Gaza, 
Longinus in Ascalon, Macrinus in Jamnia, and others; and in Phoenicia 
to Zeno, a senior bishop in Tyre, and others, along with < the bishops > 
in Coele Syria. (4) When the letters had been sent reproving those who 
had received Arius, each bishop replied to the blessed Alexander with 
his explanation. (5) And some wrote deceitfully, others truthfully, some 
explaining that they had not received him, others, that they had received 
him in ignorance, and others that they had done it to win him by hospital¬ 
ity. And this is a long story. 

,1 Later, when Arius found that letters had been sent to the bishops 
everywhere, and that afterwards he was turned away from every door 
and none but his sympathizers would take him in any more— (2) (for the 
elderly senior bishop of Nicomedia, Eusebius, was a sympathizer of his 4 
together with Lucius, his colleague in Nicomedia. And so was Leontius, the 
eunuch in Antioch who had not yet been entrusted with the episcopate, 
and certain others. Since all of them belonged to the same noxious brother¬ 
hood, Eusebius sheltered him for some time). (3) And so at that time this 
Arius wrote and addressed letters full of all sorts of foolishness, which 
contained the whole of his heretical creed, to Eusebius in Nicomedia, this 
before he had come to him in Nicomedia, putting in them no more than 
what he really thought. 1 feel obliged to offer one of them here which has 
come into my hands, so that the readers can see that 1 have neither said 
nor am saying anything slanderous against anyone. Here is the letter: 
,1 Greetings in the Lord from Arius, unjustly persecuted by Pope Alexan¬ 
derfor the all-conquering truth of which you too are a defender, to the most 
beloved man of God, the faithful and orthodox Master Eusebius. 

,2 As my father Ammonius is arriving in Nicomedia it seems to me rea¬ 
sonable and proper to address you through him, at the same time recalling 
your characteristic love and [kindly] disposition toward the brethren for the 
sake of God and his Christ. For the bishop is harassing and persecuting us 
severely, and stirring up every sort of evil against us, (3) so that he has driven 
us from the city as godless men because we do not agree with his public 
declaration, “Always God, always a Son. Together with a Father, a Son. The 
Son co-exists with God without origination, ever begotten, begotten without 
origination. Not by a thought or a moment of time is God prior to the Son, 
[but] there is ever a God, ever a Son, the Son from God himself." (4) And as 
your brother in Caesarea, Eusebius, and Theodotus, Paulinus, Athanasius, 
Gregory, Aetius and all the bishops in the east say that God is prior to the Son 
without beginning, they have become anathema—except for the ignorant 
sectarians Philogonius, Hellanicus and Macarius, some of whom say that 
the Son is an eructation and others, an uncreated emanation. (5) And to 
these impieties we cannot even listen, not if the sectarians threaten us with 
a thousand deaths. 

6,6 But what is it that we say and believe, and that we have taught and 
teach ? That the Son is not uncreated or in any respect part of an uncre¬ 
ated being, or made of anything previously existent. He was brought into 
being by the will and counsel [of God], before all times and before all ages, 
as unbegotten God in the fullest sense, and unalterable; and before he was 
begotten, created, determined or established, he did not exist. (7) But we are 
persecuted because we have said, “The Son has a beginning but God is with¬ 
out beginning.” We are also persecuted because we have said, “He is made 
from nothing.” But we have so said in the sense that he is not a part of God 
or made from any thing previously existent. It is for this reason that we are 
persecuted; the rest you know. 

I pray for your good health in the Lord, my true fellow Lucianist Eusebius; 
be mindful of my afflictions. 

7,1 Moreover, I subjoin another letter written in supposed self-defense 
from Nicomedia by Arius to the most holy Pope Athanasius and sent by 
him to Alexandria. Once again it is filled, to an incomparably worse degree, 
with the blasphemous expressions of his venom. This is the letter:
,2 Greetings in the Lord from the presbyters and deacons to our blessed 
Pope and bishop, Alexander. 

,3 Our faith which we have received from our forefathers and learned 
from you as well, blessed Pope, is as follows. We know that one God, the only 
ingenerate, the only eternal, who alone is without beginning, only is the true 
God, alone has immortality, alone is wise, alone good, alone sovereign, alone 
judge with the governance and care of all, immutable and unalterable, just 
and good, < the Lord *> of the Law and Prophets and of the New Testament — 
that this God has begotten an only Son before eternal times, (4) and through 
him has made the ages and the rest. He has begotten him not in appear¬ 
ance but in truth and brought him into being, immutable and unalterable, 
by his own will; (5) God’s perfect creature but not like any other creature; 
an offspring but not like any other offspring; (6) and not an emanation, as 
Valentinus believed the Father’s offspring to be; nor as Mani represented the 
offspring as a co-essential part of the Father; nor like Sabellius, who, dividing 
the Unity, said “Son-Father”; nor as Hieracas called him a light kindledfrom 
a light, or a lamp become two; (7) nor priorly existent and later generated or 
created anew as a Son. You yourself, blessed Pope, have very often publicly 
denounced those who give these explanations in the church and assembly. 
But as we say, He is a Son created by the will of God before the times and 
ages, who has received his life, being and glory from the Father, the Father 
subsisting together with him. For by giving him the inheritance of all things 
the Father did not deprive himself of his possession of ingeneracy in himself, 
for he is the source of all. 

8,1 Thus there are three entities, a Father, a Son and a Holy Spirit. And 
God, who is the cause of all, is the sole and only being without beginning. But 
the Son, who was begotten of the Father though not in time, and who was 
created and established before the ages, did not exist before his begetting 
but was alone brought into being before all things by the Father alone, not 
in time. (2) Nor is he eternal, or co-eternal and co-uncreated with the Father. 
Nor does he have a being simultaneous with the Father’s, as some speak of 
things [which are naturally] related to something else, thus introducing two 
uncreateds. But God is before all as a Unit and thefirst principle of all things. 
And thus he is also before Christ, as we have learned fromyou when you have 
preached publicly < in > the church. 

,3 Thus, in that the Son has his being from God < who > has provided 
him with life, glory and all things, God is his first cause. For God is his ruler, 
as his God and prior to him in existence, because the Son originates from 
him. (4) And if “out of the belly , 1 and “I came forth from the Father and am 
come, ” 7 8 are taken by some to mean that he is part of a co-essential God and 
an emanation, the Father must be composite, divisible and mutable—and 
in their opinion the incorporeal God has a body and, given their premises, 
is subject to the consequences of corporeality. We pray for your good health 
in the Lord, blessed Pope. (5) Arius, Aeithales, Achillas, Carpones, Sarma- 
tas, Arius, presbyters; the deacons Euzoeus, Lucius, Julius, Menas, Helladius, 
Gains; the bishops Secundus of Pentapolis, Theonas of Libya, Pistus —the 
bishop the Arians consecrated for Alexandria. 

g,r Now that matters had been stirred up in this way, Alexander wrote 
to the emperor Constantine. And the blessed emperor summoned Arius 
and certain bishops, and interrogated them. (2) But < with the support > 
of his co-religionists Arius at first denied the charge before the emperor, 
while inwardly hatching the plot against the church. And after summoning 
him the blessed Constantine, as though to some degree inspired < by > the 
Holy Spirit, addressed him saying, “I trust in God that if you are holding 
something back and denying it, the Lord of all has the power to confound 
you speedily, especially since it is by him that you have sworn.” Hence 
Arius was indeed caught holding the same opinions, and was exposed 
before the emperor. 

g,3 But he made a similar denial again, and many of his defenders peti¬ 
tioned the emperor for him through Eusebius of Nicomedia. But mean¬ 
while the emperor was moved with zeal, and wrote a long circular against 
Arius and his creed to the whole Roman realm, filled with all sorts of wis¬ 
dom and truthful sayings. (4) It is still preserved among the scholarly and 
begins, “The most high Augustus Constantine, to Arius and the Arians. A 
bad expositor is in very truth the image and representation of the devil.” 9 
(5) Then, after some other remarks and after giving a long refutation of 
Arius from the sacred scripture, he also indignantly directed a line from 
Homer against him and quoted it, and I feel that I must quote it here as 
well. (6) It goes, “Come now, Ares Arius, there is a need for shields. Do this 
not, we pray; let Aphrodite’s speech restrain thee.”
10,i n Arius wished to be received back into the church in Constanti¬ 
nople, and Eusebius pressed for this and had great influence with the 
emperor, and kept pestering the bishop of Constantinople at that time. 
The bishop did not wish to be in the same fellowship with Arius or enter 
into communion with him, and was troubled and groaned, but Eusebius 
said, “If you won’t do it by your own choice he’ll come in with me tomor¬ 
row at the dawn of the Lord’s Day, and what can you do about it?” 

10,2 That most pious and godfearing bishop, Alexander, bishop of the 
best of cities—(he and the bishop in Alexandria had the same name)— 
spent the whole day after he heard that, and the night, in groans and 
mourning, praying and beseeching God either to take his life so that he 
would not be polluted by communion with Arius, or to work some won¬ 
der. And his prayer was answered. (3) Arius went out that night from the 
need to relieve himself, went to the privy, sat down in the stalls inside, 
and suddenly burst and expired. Thus, he was overtaken and surrendered 
his life in a smelly place, just as he had belched out a dirty heresy, 