I wished you no harm, I did you no injury, I wrested nothing from you violently. It was in a monastery of brothers–and of foreign brothers who owe nothing to your province!—that, due to my own insignificant self nostra parvitas, which Epiphanius also uses of himself below, perhaps originally ἡμέτερος ταπεινότης, a phrase Epiphanius uses of himself in the Panarion.and letters which I sent frequently to them, they began to have a disagreement about communion with you. So that they would not by some strictness or conscience be perceived to be divided from the Church of ancient faith, I ordained a deacon and, after he ministered, made him again a presbyter, for which you ought to be grateful, understanding that I was compelled to do this because of fear of God; especially since there is no distinction in God’s priesthood sacerdotio dei; sacerdos usually means bishop: Epiphanius is stating that every bishop has the same share of ecclesiastical authoritywhere it is provided for the Church’s use. For even if individual bishops of the Church have churches under them to which they are perceived to exert care, and no one may be extended past someone else’s limits, nonetheless the love of Christ, in which there is no hypocrisy, takes precedence before everything. We shouldn’t focus on what was done, but on when and how and for whom and why it was done.

So I saw the multitude of holy brothers stationed in the monastery, and that the holy presbyters Jerome and Vincentius, because of modesty and humility, did not want to oversee the offerings which are owed to their rank and to toil for the monastery in that area which is particularly for the salvation of Christians. I saw, what’s more, that you couldn’t find and capture that one enslaved to God, who often fled from you because he didn’t want to accept the heavy burden of the priesthood. I saw that no other of the bishops could easily recover him. So I was sufficiently amazed when, at the arrangement of God, he came to me with the monastery’s deacons, and with other brothers, to make satisfaction to me since I had some grudge or other against them.

Now when the service collecta, likely σύναξις (sunaxis)was celebrated in village church which is near my monastery, Epiphanius had been visiting “his” monastery, that is, the monastery he led before becoming bishop of Cyprus and over which he still exercised remote authority decades later.I commanded him—unknowing, and having no suspicion within—to be seized by several deacons and for his mouth be held (in fear that perhaps in desiring to be let go he might plead with us through Christ’s name). Now first I ordained him a deacon, setting before him the fear of God and compelling him to minister; of course he struggled vigorously, swearing that he was unworthy. Barely did I compel him and I was able to convince him with testimony from Scriptures and by setting before him God’s commands. And when he had ministered in the holy offerings, once more with his mouth held with enormous difficulty, I ordained him presbyter; and with these words, which which I convinced him before, I compelled him to sit among the ranks of presbyters.

After this I wrote to the holy presbyters of the monastery, that is, the monastery of Paulinian and Jeromeand the rest of the brothers; and I upbraided them, since they had not written me about him, when the year before I had heard many of them complain how they didn’t have anyone who could perform the Lord’s sacraments for them, and by their own testimony they all begged him and testified how greatly useful it would be to the monastic community; why then when the opportunity arose didn’t they write to me, and beg me to do something about his ordination?

2. So these things were done, as I said, in Christ’s love, which I believed you possessed for my insignificant self; moreover I ordained him in the monastery, and not in the jurisdiction Jerome transliterates the Greek word παροικία (paroikia)which is subject to you. O truly blessed meekness and goodness of the bishops of Cyprus, although our boorishness to your mind and judgment is worthy of God’s pity! For many bishops in communion with me have ordained presbyters in our province, whom I have been unable to capture, and they have sent me deacons and subdeacons, Jerome transliterates the Greek ὑποδιάκονος (hupodiakonos)whom I receive with thanks. And I myself encouraged Bishop Philo of blessed memory and saint Theoprepus, that in the churches of Cyprus which were near them, which appeared to belong to the church of my jurisdiction (because the province is big and wide-ranging) they ordain presbyters and provide them to Christ’s church. I have never ordained deaconesses and sent them to other provinces, nor have I done anything to cause a schism in the church. So why has it seemed fitting to you in this way to be so deeply outraged and to be disturbed against me for doing God’s work, which was for the building up and not the tearing down of the brothers?

But also I am exceedingly amazed that you spoke to my clerics, asserting that you commanded me, through the holy presbyter and abbot of the monks Gregory, that I should ordain no one; and that I promised this, saying: “Am I a child, don’t I know the rules?” Listen now to the truth in God’s word: I didn’t hear this, I was unaware of it, I have absolutely no recollection of this statement. Nonetheless I supposed these might be perhaps among the many things I, a mere human being, have forgotten. Because of this I inquired of saint Gregory and Zeno the presbyter who is with him. Of these things Abba Gregory replied he knew absolutely nothing. Zeno moreover said that when the presbyter Rufinus was speaking about some other matters in passing, he said this to him: “Do you think the holy bishop will be ordaining some people?” and the discussion stopped at that point. Nonetheless I, Epiphanius, did not hear anything nor did I make a reply. So, my dearest one, may fury not get the better of you, nor indignation overcome you, nor be moved in vain; and upset about one thing you switch to other things Epiphanius suggests John’s anger over the ordination is a pretense and that his anger is really over their theological differences.and you seem to have found an opportunity for sinning. But the prophet in caution entreats the Lord: “Do not incline my heart into words of evil, making excuses for my sins” (Ps 140:4).