Against Ebionites.1 Number ten, but thirty of the series
1,1 Following these and holding views like theirs, Ebion,2 the founder of
the Ebionites, arose in the world in his turn as a monstrosity with many
forms, and practically represented in himself the snake-like form of the
mythical many-headed hydra. He was of the Nazoraeans’ school, but
preached and taught other things than they.
1,2 For it was as though someone were to collect a set of jewelry
from various precious stones and an outfit of varicolored clothing and tog
himself up conspicuously. Ebion, in reverse, took any and every doctrine
which was dreadful, lethal, disgusting, ugly and unconvincing, thoroughly
contentious, from every sect, and patterned himself after them all. (3) For
he has the Samaritans’ unpleasantness but the Jews’ name, the opinion of
the Ossaeans, Nazoraeans and Nasaraeans, the form of the Cerinthians,
and the perversity of the Carpocratians. And he wants to have just the
Christians’ title—most certainly not their behavior, opinion and knowledge,
and the consensus as to faith of the Gospels and Apostles!
1,4 But since he is midway between all the sects, as one might say, he
amounts to nothing. The words of scripture, “I was almost in all evil, in the
midst of the church and synagogue,”3 are applicable to him. (5) For although
he is Samaritan, he rejects the name because of its objectionability. And
while professing himself a Jew, he is the opposite of the Jews—though he
does agree with them in part as I shall prove later with God’s help, through
the proofs of it in my rebuttal of them.
2,1 For this Ebion was contemporary with the Jews, and < since he
was > with them, he was derived from them. (2) In the first place, he said

that Christ was conceived by sexual intercourse and the seed of a man,
Joseph4—I have already said that he agreed with the others in everything,
with this one difference, his adherence to Judaism’s Law of the Sabbath,
circumcision, and all the other Jewish and Samaritan observances. (3) But
like the Samaritans he goes still further than the Jews. He added the rule
about taking care not to touch a gentile;5 (4) and that every day, if a man has
been with a woman6 and has left her, he must immerse himself in water—
any water he can find, the sea or any other. (5) Moreover, if he should meet
anyone while returning from his immersion and bath in the water, he runs
back again for another immersion, often even with his clothes on!7
2,6 This sect now forbids celibacy and continence altogether,8 as do
the other sects which are like it. For at one time they prided themselves
on virginity, presumably because of James the Lord’s brother,< and so >
address their treatises to “elders and virgins.”9
2,7 Their origin came after the fall of Jerusalem. For since practically
all who had come to faith in Christ had settled in Peraea then, in Pella,
a town in the “Decapolis”10 the Gospel mentions, which is near Batanaea
and Bashanitis—as they had moved there then and were living there,
this provided an opportunity for Ebion. (8) And as far as I know, he first
lived in a village called Cocabe in the district of Qarnaim—also called
Ashtaroth—in Bashanitis. There he began his evil teaching—the place, if
you please, where the Nazoraeans I have spoken of came from. (9) For since
Ebion was connected with them and they with him, each party shared its
own wickedness with the other. Each also differed from the other to some
extent, but they emulated each other in malice. But I have already spoken
at length, both in other works and in the other Sects, about the locations
of Cocabe and Arabia.

3,1 And at first, as I said, Ebion declared that Christ is the offspring of
a man, that is, of Joseph. For a while now, however, various of his followers
have been giving conflicting accounts of Christ, as though they have decided
on something untenable and impossible themselves. (2) But I think it may be
since they were joined by Elxai—the false prophet < I mentioned earlier >
in the tracts called “Sampsaeans,” “Ossenes” and “Elkasaites”—that they
tell an imaginary story about Christ and the Holy Spirit as he did.
3,311 For some of them even say that Adam is Christ—the man who
was formed first and infused with God’s breath.12 (4) But others among
them say that he is from above; created before all things, a spirit, both
higher than the angels and Lord of all; and that he is called Christ, the
heir of the world there.13 But he comes here when he chooses,14 as he came
in Adam and appeared to the patriarchs clothed with Adam’s body. And
in the last days the same Christ who had come to Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, came and donned Adam’s body, and appeared to men, was crucified, rose and ascended. (6) But again, when they choose to, they say, “No!
The Spirit—that is, the Christ—came to him and put on the man called
Jesus.”15 And they get all giddy from making different suppositions about
him at different times.
3,7 They too accept the Gospel according to Matthew. Like the Cerinthians and Merinthians, they too use it alone. They call it, “According
to the Hebrews,” and it is true to say that only Matthew expounded and
preached the Gospel in the Hebrew language and alphabet16 in the New
Testament.
3,8 But some may already have replied that the Gospel of John too,
translated from Greek to Hebrew, is in the Jewish treasuries, I mean the
treasuries at Tiberias, and is stored there secretly, as certain Jewish converts
have described to me in detail. (9) And not only that, but it is said that the
book of the Acts of the Apostles, also translated from Greek to Hebrew,
is there in the treasuries, so that the Jews who have read it, the ones who
told me about it, have been converted to Christ from this.
4,1 One of them was Josephus—not the ancient Josephus, the author
and chronicler, but Josephus of Tiberias, < born > during the old age of
the Emperor Constantine of blessed memory. This Josephus was awarded
the rank of count by the Emperor himself, and was authorized to build a
church for Christ in Tiberias itself, and in Diocaesarea, Capernaum and
the other towns. He also suffered a great deal from the Jews themselves
before he came to the Emperor’s notice.
4,2 For this Josephus was counted as one of their men of rank. There
are such persons, < who > rank next after the patriarch and are called
“apostles.”17 They attend on the patriarch, and often stay with him day and
night without intermission, to give him counsel and refer points of law to
him. (3) Now the patriarch at that time was called Ellel. (I think that was
how Josephus pronounced his name, unless I am mistaken because of the
time). He was descended from the Gamaliel who had been one of their
patriarchs. (4) One may suspect, and others have suggested this as well,
that these patriarchs were descended from the first Gamaliel, the Savior’s
contemporary, who gave the godly counsel of refraining from abuse of
the apostles.
4,5 When Ellel was dying he asked for the bishop who then lived near
Tiberias, and received holy baptism from him in extremis for a pretendedly
medical reason. (6) For he had sent for him by Josephus, as though he were
a doctor, and he had the room cleared and begged the bishop, “Give me
the seal in Christ!” (7) The bishop summoned the servants and ordered
water prepared, as though intending to give the patriarch, who was very
sick, some treatment for his illness with water. They did what they were told,
for they did not know. And sending everyone out from pretended modesty
the patriarch was vouchsafed the laver and the holy mysteries.
5,1 Josephus told me < this > in conversation. For I heard all this from
his own lips and not from anyone else, in his old age when he was about
70 or even more. (2) For I was entertained at his home in Scythopolis; he
had moved from Tiberias, and owned a notable estate there in Scythopolis.
Eusebius of blessed memory, the bishop of Vercelli in Italy, was Josephus’
guest, since he had been banished by Constantius for his orthodox faith.
I and the other brethren had come there to visit him, and we were entertained too, along with Eusebius.
5,3 Now when I met Josephus at his home, asked him about himself,
and found that he had been a prominent Jew, I also inquired his reason,
and why it was that he had come over to Christianity. And I heard all this
plainly (from him), not at secondhand from anyone else. (4) And since I
think that, because of the Hebrew translations in the treasuries, the things
the man went through are worth recording for the edification of the faithful, I deliberately give Josephus’ entire reason.
5,5 Josephus was not only privileged to become a faithful Christian,
but a great despiser of Arians as well. In that city, I mean Scythopolis, he
was the only orthodox Christian—they were all Arians. (6) Had it not been
that he was a count, and the rank of count protected him from Arian persecution, he could not even have undertaken to live in the town, especially
while Patrophilus was the Arian bishop. Patrophilus was very influential
because of his wealth and severity, and his familiar acquaintance with the
Emperor Constantius. (7) But there was another, younger man in town
too, an orthodox believer of Jewish parentage. He did not even dare < to
associate > with me in public, though he used to visit me secretly.
5,8 But Josephus told me something plausible and amusing, though I
would think that even < here > he was telling the truth. He claimed that
after his wife died, fearing that the Arians might take him by force and
make him a cleric—to flatter him into conversion to the sect they would
often promise him higher preferments if need be, and to make him a
bishop. Well, he claimed that this was why he had married a second wife,
to escape their ordinations!
6,1 But I shall go back to telling the story of the patriarch and make
Josephus’ own story known in all its particulars to those who care to read
it, in the words he used to me. (2) “Just as the patriarch was being granted
baptism,” he told me, “I was peeping in through the cracks in the doors
and realized what the bishop was doing to the patriarch—found it out,
and kept it to myself. (3) For besides,” Josephus said, “the patriarch had
a very ample sum of money ready, and he reached out, gave it to the
bishop, and said, ‘Offer it for me. It is written that things are bound and
loosed on earth through the priests of God, and < that > these things will
be loosed and bound in heaven.’18 (4) When this was over,” he said, “and
the doors were opened, the patriarch’s visitors asked him how he was after
his treatment, and he replied that he was very well For he knew what he
was talking about!”
6,5 Then < after > two or three days, with the bishop visiting him often
in the guise of a physician, the patriarch fell asleep with a good hope in
store. He had entrusted his own son, who was quite young, to Josephus
and another very capable < elder >. (6) All business, then, was transacted
through these two, since the patriarch, being a boy, was still childish, and
was being brought up under their supervision.
6,7 During this time Josephus’ mind was often troubled over the
rites that had been performed in the affair of the baptism, and he was
considering what he should do. Now there was a “gazophylacium” there
which was sealed—“gaza” means “treasure” in Hebrew. (8) As many had
different notions about this treasury because of its seal, Josephus plucked
up the courage to open it unobserved—and found no money, but books
money could not buy. (9) Browsing through them he found the Gospel
of John translated from Greek to Hebrew, as I said, and the Acts of the
Apostles—and Matthew’s Gospel moreover, which is actually Hebrew.
After reading from them he was once more distressed in mind, for he was
somehow troubled over the faith of Christ. But now he was prodded for
two reasons, his reading of the books and the patriarch’s initiation. Still,
as often happens, his heart was hardened.
7,1 While all his time was occupied with these things, the boy Ellel
had left to be reared as patriarch was growing up. (No one usurps the positions of authority among the Jews, but son succeeds father.) (2) Just as the
lad was reaching full vigor some idle youths of his own age with vicious
habits unfortunately met him. (I guess he was called Judas, but because of
the time I am not quite sure.) (3) His young contemporaries got him into
many evil practices, seductions of women and unholy sexual unions. They
undertook to help him in his licentious < activities > with certain magic
devices—making certain love-philtres and compelling free women with
incantations to be brought under duress for his seduction.
7,4 Josephus and his fellow elder, who were obliged to attend the boy,
bore this with difficulty and often both charged him and admonished him
verbally. But he preferred to listen to the young men, and he hid his indecencies and denied them. And Josephus did not dare to voice his accusations
of him openly; instead he admonished him, as though for his education.
7,5 Well, they went to Gadara for the hot baths. There is a gathering
there every year. Persons who wish to bathe for a certain number of days
arrive from every quarter supposedly to get rid of their ailments, though
this is a trick of the devil. For where wonders have been given by God
the adversary has already spread his deadly nets—the bathing there is
mixed!
7,6 There happened to be a free woman of unusual beauty in the
bath. Lured by the habit of his licentiousness the young man rubbed his
side against the woman’s as he strolled about in the hot-air room. (7) But
being Christian, she naturally made the sign of the cross. (There was no
need for her to behave improperly and bathe in mixed company. These
things happen to simple lay persons, from the laxity of the teachers who
do not forewarn them through their instruction.) (8) Still, that God might
make his wonders manifest, the youngster, I mean the patriarch, failed in
his enterprise. For he sent emissaries to the woman and promised her gifts;
but she insulted his messengers and did not yield to the pampered youth’s
futile efforts.
8,1 Then, when his helpers learned of the boy’s pain which he betrayed
for the girl, they undertook to prepare more powerful magic for him, as
Josephus himself described it to me in full. (2) After sunset they took the
unfortunate lad to the neighboring cemetery. (In my country there are
places of assembly of this kind, called “caverns,” made by hewing them
out of cliff sides.) (3) Taking him there the cheats who accompanied him
recited certain incantations and spells, and did very impious things to him
and in the name of the woman.
8,4 By God’s will this came to the attention of the other elder, Josephus’
partner, and on realizing what was happening, he told Josephus. And he
began by bemoaning his lot, and said, “Brother, we are wretched men and
vessels of destruction! What sort of person are we attending?” (5) And when
Josephus asked the reason, no sooner were the words out of his mouth than
the elder seized his hand and took Josephus to the place where the persons
doomed to die, with the youth, were holding their assembly in the cemetery
for magic. (6) Standing outside the door they listened to what the others
were doing, but withdrew when they came out. (It was not dark yet; it was
just about sundown, and one could still see dimly.) (7) After the monsters
of impiety had left the tomb Josephus went in and saw certain < vessels >
and other implements of jugglery thrown on the ground. They made water
on them and covered them with a heap of dust, he said, and left.
8,8 But they knew the sort of woman on whose account they had
plotted these wicked things, and he watched to see whether they would
win. (9) When the sorcerers had not prevailed—the woman had the aid
of the sign and faith of Christ—he learned that the youngster had waited
for the girl’s arrival on three nights, and later quarreled with the persons
who had performed the jugglery because he had not succeeded. (10) This
made Josephus’ third lesson—where Christ’s name was, and the sign of
his cross, the power of sorcery did not prevail. But at this point he was by
no means convinced that he should become a Christian.
9,1 Then the Lord appeared to him in a dream, and said, “I am
Jesus, whom your forefathers crucified; but believe in me.” When he was
not convinced even by his he fell into grave illness and was given up for
lost. But the Lord appeared to him again, and told him to believe and he
would be healed. And he promised and recovered, and again persevered
in his obstinacy.
9,2 He fell ill a second time in turn, and was given up in the same
way. When he was assumed to be dying by his Jewish kin he heard the
words from them that they always repeat in secrecy among themselves.
(3) An elder, a scholar of the law, came and whispered to him, “Believe
< in > Jesus, crucified under Pontius Pilate the governor, Son of God first
yet later born of Mary; the Christ of God and risen from the dead. And
believe that he will come to judge and quick and the dead.” That same
Josephus told me this plainly during his story, as I can truthfully say.
9,4 Besides, I have heard this sort of thing from someone else. He
was still a Jew from fear of the Jews, but he often spent time in Christian
company, and he honored Christians and loved them. He traveled with
me in the wilderness of Bethel and Ephraim, when I was going up to the
mountains from Jericho and saying something to him about the advent of
Christ, and he did not dispute it. (5) I was amazed—he was learned in the
Law as well and able to argue—and I asked the reason why he did not
dispute, but agreed with me, about Jesus Christ our Lord. I had got no
further than this when he too revealed to me that when he himself had
been near death they had told him secretly, in a whisper, “Jesus Christ, the
crucified Son of God, will judge you.” (6) But let this be recorded here,
from a genuine report about these persons and about this formula.
10,1 Josephus was still sick. And though, as I said, the presbyter, along
with the others, had told him, “Jesus Christ will judge you,” he was still
hardened. But the Lord in his lovingkindness again said to him in a dream,
“Lo, I heal you; but rise and believe!” But though he recovered again, he
did not believe. (2) When he was well the Lord appeared to him in a dream
once more and scolded him for not believing. And he promised him, “If, for
an assurance of your faith, you choose to work any miracle in my name,
call upon me and I will do it.”
10,3 There was a madman in the city who used to roam the town, I
mean Tiberias, naked. If he was dressed he would often tear his clothing
apart, as such people will. (4) Now Josephus was overcome with awe and
wished to put the vision to the test, although he was still doubtful. So he
brought the man inside, shut the door, took water, made the sign of the
cross over it, and sprinkled it on the madman with the words, “In the name
of Jesus of Nazareth the crucified begone from him, demon, and let him
be made whole!”
10,5 Falling down with a loud cry, the man lay motionless for a long
time foaming profusely and retching, and Josephus supposed that he had
died. (6) But after a while he rubbed his forehead and got up and, once on
his feet and seeing his own nakedness, he hid himself and covered his privy
parts with his hands, for he could no longer bear to see his own nakedness.
(7) Dressed by Josephus himself in one of his own himatia, in proof of his
comprehension and sanity, he came and thanked him and God profusely,
for he realized that he had been cured through Josephus. He spread word
of him in town, and this miracle became known to the Jews there. (8) Much
talk ensued in the city from people saying that Josephus had opened the
treasuries, found the Name of God in writing and read it, and was working geat miracles. And what they were saying was true, though not in the
way they thought.
10,9 Josephus, however, still remained hardened in heart. But the merciful God who is continually arranging good opportunities for those who
love him, grants them to those whom he deems worthy of life. (11,1) As
things turned out for Josephus himself, after Judas the patriarch, of whom
we have spoken, grew up—I guess he was called that—to repay Josephus
he granted him the revenue of the apostolate. (2) He was sent to Cilicia
with a commission, and on arriving there collected the tithes and firstfruits
from the Jews of the province, from every city in Cilicia. (3) At this time
he lodged next to the church, I don’t know in which city. But he made
friends with the bishop there, < went to him > unobserved, borrowed the
Gospels and read them.
11,4 Since < he was > very severe as an apostle should be—as I said,
this is their name for the rank—and indeed was a reformer, he was always
intent on what would make for the establishment of good order and purged
and demoted many of the appointed synagogue-heads, priests, elders and
“azanites” (meaning their kind of deacons or assistants), many were angry
with him. As though in an attempt to pay him back these people took no
little trouble to pry into his affairs and find out what he was doing. (5) For
this reason a crowd of meddlers burst in upon him at home in his residence, and caught him pouring over the Gospels. They seized the book
and grabbed the man, dragged him to the floor with shouts, bore him off
to the synagogue with no light mistreatment, and beat him as the Law
prescribes. (6) This made his first trial; however, the bishop of the town
arrived and got him out. Another time they caught him on a journey, he
told me, and threw him into the river Cydnus. < When they saw > him
taken by the current they thought he had gone under and drowned, and
were glad of it.
11,7 But a little later he was vouchsafed holy baptism—for he was
rescued (from the river). He went to court, made friends with the Emperor
Constantine, and told him his whole story—how he was of the highest
Jewish rank, and how the divine visions kept appearing to him, since the
Lord was summoning him to his holy calling, and the salvation of his faith
and knowledge. (8) And the good emperor—a true servant of Christ, and,
after David, Hezekiah and Josiah, the king with the most godly zeal—
rewarded him with a rank in his realm, as I have said already. (9) He made
him a count and told him to ask what he wanted in his turn.
Josephus asked nothing of the emperor but this very great favor—permission by imperial rescript to build Christ’s churches in the Jewish towns
and villages where no one had ever been able to found churches, since
there are no Greeks, Samaritans or Christians among the population.
(10) This < rule > of having no gentiles among them is observed especially
at Tiberias, Diocaesarea, Sepphoris, Nazareth and Capernaum.
12,1 After receiving the letter and the authorization along with his title,
Josephus came to Tiberias. Besides, he had a draft on the imperial treasury,
and he himself had been honored with a salary from the emperor.
12,2 And so he began to build in Tiberias. There was a very large
temple in the town already, I think they may have called it the Adrianeum.
The citizens may have been trying to restore this Adrianeum, which was
standing unfinished, for a public bath. (3) When Josephus found this he
took the opportunity from it; and as he found that there were already four
walls raised to some height, made of stones four feet long, he began the
erection of the church from that point.
12,4 But lime was needed, and the other building material. He therefore had a number of ovens, perhaps seven altogether, set up outside the
city. (In the language of the country they call these “furnaces.”) But the
horrid Jews who are always up to trying anything did not spare their usual
sorcery. Those grand Jews wasted their time on magic and jugglery to bind
the fire, but they did not entirely succeed.
12,5 Well, the fire was smouldering and not doing anything but had
practically ceased to be fire.19 When those whose task it was to feed the
fire with fuel—I mean brushwood or scrub—told Josephus what had been
done he rushed from the city, stung to the quick and moved with zeal for
the Lord. (6) He ordered water fetched in a vessel, (I mean a flask, but the
local inhabitants call this a “cacubium,”) < and > took this vessel of water
in the sight of all—a crowd of Jews had gathered to watch, eager to see
how it would turn out and what Josephus would try to do. Tracing the sign
of the cross on the vessel with his own finger, and invoking the name of
Jesus, he cried out, (7) “In the name of Jesus of Nazareth, whom my fathers
and those of all here present crucified, may there be power in this water
to set at naught all sorcery and enchantment these men have wrought, and
to work a miracle on the fire that the Lord’s house may be finished.”
(8) With that he wet his hand and sprinkled the water on each furnace.
And the spells were broken, and in the presence of all, the fire blazed up.
And the crowds of spectators cried, “There is one God, who comes to the
aid of the Christians,” and went away.
12,9 Though they harmed the man on many occasions, he eventually
restored part of the temple at Tiberias and finished a small church. He left
then and came to Scythopolis and made his home. However, he completed
buildings in Diocaesarea and certain other towns. (10) So much for my
account and description of these events, which I recalled here because of
the translation of the books, the rendering from Greek to Hebrew of the
Gospel of John and the Acts of the Apostles.
13,1 But I shall resume the thread of my argument against Ebion—
because of the Gospel according to Matthew the course of the discussion
obliged me to insert the whole of the knowledge which I had gained.
(2) Now in what they call a Gospel according to Matthew, though it is not
the entire Gospel but is corrupt and mutilated—and they call this thing
“Hebrew”!—the following passage is found: “There was a certain man
named Jesus, and he was about thirty years of age,20 who chose us. And
coming to Capernaum he entered into the house of Simon surnamed Peter,
and opened his mouth and said, (3) Passing beside the Sea of Tiberias I
chose John and James, the sons of Zebedee,21 and Simon and Andrew
and < Philip and Bartholomew, James the son of Alphaeus and Thomas >,
Thaddaeus, Simon the Zealot, and Judas Iscariot.22 Thee too, Matthew,
seated at the receipt of custom, did I call, and thou didst follow me.23 I
will, then, that ye be twelve apostles24 for a testimony to Israel.” (4) And,
“John came baptizing, and there went out unto him Pharisees and were
baptized, and all Jerusalem. And John had a garment of camel’s hair, and
a girdle of skin about his loins. And his meat,” it says, “was wild honey,
whose taste was the taste of manna, as a cake in oil.”25 (5) This, if you
please, to turn the account of the truth into falsehood, and substitute
“a cake in honey” for “locusts”!
13,6 But the beginning of their Gospel is, “It came to pass in the days
of Herod, king of Judaea, < in the high-priesthood of Caiaphas >, that
< a certain > man, John < by name >, came baptizing with the baptism
of repentance in the river Jordan, and he was said to be of the lineage of
Aaron the priest, the son of Zacharias and Elizabeth, and all went out unto
him.”26 (7) And after saying a good deal it adds, “When the people had
been baptized Jesus came also and was baptized of John. And as he came
up out of the water the heavens were opened, and he saw the Holy Spirit
in the form of a dove which descended and entered into him. And (there
came) a voice from heaven saying, Thou art my beloved Son, in thee I am
well pleased,27 and again, This day have I begotten thee.28 And straightway
a great light shone round about the place.29 Seeing this,” it says, “John said
unto him, Who art thou, Lord?30 And again (there came) a voice to him
from heaven, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.31 (8)
And then,” it says, “John fell down before him and said, I pray thee, Lord,
do thou baptize me. But he forbade him saying, Let it alone, for thus it is
meet that all be fulfilled.”32
14,1 See how their utterly false teaching is all lame, crooked, and not
right anywhere! (2) For by supposedly using their same < so-called Gospel
according to Matthew > Cerinthus and Carpocrates want to prove from
the beginning of Matthew, by the genealogy, that Christ is the product of
Joseph’s seed and Mary. (3) But these people have something else in mind.
They falsify the genealogical tables in Matthew’s Gospel and make its
opening, as I said, “It came to pass in the days of Herod, king of Judaea,
in the high-priesthood of Caiaphas, that a certain man, John by name,
came baptizing with the baptism of repentance in the river Jordan” and
so on. (4) This is because they maintain that Jesus is really a man, as I
said, but that Christ, who descended in the form of a dove, has entered
him—as we have found already in other sects—< and > been united with
him. Christ himself < is from God on high, but Jesus > is the offspring of
a man’s seed and a woman.
14,5 But again they deny that he is a man, supposedly on the basis of
the words the Savior spoke when he was told, “Behold thy mother and thy
brethren stand without,” “Who are my mother and my brethren? And he
stretched forth his hand toward his disciples and said, These are my brethren and mother and sisters, these that do the will of my Father.” (6) And
so Ebion, as I said, who is crammed with all sorts of trickery, shows himself
in many forms—making him a monstrosity, as I indicated above.
15,1 But they use certain other books as well—supposedly the so-called
Travels of Peter written by Clement, though they corrupt their contents
while leaving a few genuine passages. (2) Clement himself convicts them
of this in every way in his general epistles which are read in the holy
churches, because his faith and speech are of a different character than
their spurious productions in his name in the Travels. He himself teaches
celibacy, and they will not accept it. He extols Elijah, David, Samson and
all the prophets, whom they abhor.33
15,3 In the Travels they have changed everything to suit themselves
and slandered Peter in many ways, saying that he was baptized daily34 for
purification as they are. And they say he abstained from flesh and dressed
meat as they do, and any other dish made from meat—since both Ebion
himself, and Ebionites, entirely abstain from these.35 (4) When you ask one
of them why they do not eat meat, having no explanation they answer
foolishly and say, “Since it is a product of the congress and intercourse of
bodies, we do not eat it.” Thus, according to their own foolish regurgitations, they are wholly abominable themselves, since they are the results of
the intercourse of a man and a woman.
16,1 They too receive baptism, apart from their daily baptisms. And
they celebrate supposed mysteries from year to year in imitation of the
sacred mysteries of the church, using unleavened bread—and the other
part of the mystery with water only.
16,2 But as I said, they set side by side two who have been appointed
by God, one being Christ, but one the devil. And they say that Christ has
been allotted the world to come, but that this world has been entrusted
to the devil36—supposedly by the decree of the Almighty, at the request
of each of them. (3) And they say that this is why Jesus was begotten of
the seed of a man and chosen, and thus has been named Son of God by
election, after the Christ who came to him from on high in the form of a
dove. (4) But they say that he is not begotten of God the Father but created as one of the archangels, and that he is ruler both of angels and of
all creatures of < the > Almighty; and that he came and instructed us < to
abolish the sacrifices >. (5) As their so-called Gospel says, “I came to abolish
the sacrifices, and if ye cease not from sacrifice, wrath will not cease from
you.”37 Both these and certain things of the kind are guileful inventions
which are current among them.
16,6 They speak of other Acts of Apostles in which there is much
thoroughly impious material, and from them arm themselves against the
truth in deadly earnest. (7) They lay down certain ascents and instructions
in the supposed “Ascents of James,” as though he were giving orders against
the temple and sacrifices, and the fire on the altar—and much else that is
full of nonsense.
16,8 Nor are they ashamed to accuse Paul38 here with certain fabrications of their false apostles’ villainy and imposture. They say that he was
Tarsean—which he admits himself and does not deny. And they suppose
that he was of Greek parentage, taking the occasion for this from the (same)
passage because of his frank statement, “I am a man of Tarsus, a citizen
of no mean city.”39 (9) They then claim that he was Greek and the son of
a Greek mother and Greek father, but that he had gone up to Jerusalem,
stayed there for a while, desired to marry a daughter of the high priest,
and had therefore became a proselyte and been circumcised. But since he
still could not marry that sort of girl he became angry and wrote against
circumcision, and against the Sabbath and the legislation.
17,1 But he is making a completely false accusation, this horrid serpent
with his poverty of understanding. For “Ebion,” translated from Hebrew
to Greek, means “poor.” For truly he is poor, in understanding, hope and
actuality, since he regards Christ as a mere man, and thus has come to
hope in him with poverty of faith.40 (2) They themselves, if you please,
boastfully claim that they are poor because they sold their possessions in
the apostles’ time and laid them at the apostles’ feet, and went over to a
life of poverty and renunciation;41 and thus, they say, they are called “poor”
by everyone. (3) But there is no truth to this claim of theirs either; he was
really named Ebion.42 I suppose the poor wretch was named prophetically
by his father and mother.
17,4 And how many other dreadful, false, observances they have, chock
full of wickedness! When one of them falls ill or is bitten by a snake, he
gets into water and invokes the names in Elxai—of heaven, earth, salt,
water, winds, “angels of righteousness” < as > they say, bread and oil43—and
begins to say, “Come to my aid and rid me of my pain!”
17,5 But I have already indicated, even before this, that Ebion did not
know of these things. After a time his followers became associated with
Elxai, and they have the circumcision, the Sabbath and the customs of
Ebion, but Elxai’s delusion. (6) Thus they believe that Christ is a manlike
figure invisible to human eyes, ninety-six miles—or twenty-four schoena, if
you please!—tall; six schoena, or twenty-four miles wide; and some other
measurement through. Opposite him the Holy Spirit stands invisibly as
well, in the form of a female, with the same dimensions. (7) “And how did
I find the dimensions?” he says. “I saw from the mountains that the heads
were level with them, and from observing the height of the mountain, I
learned the dimensions of Christ and the Holy Spirit.” (8) I have already
spoken of this in the Sect, “Against Ossaeans.” I have put it down here
though, in passing, lest it be thought that I fail from forgetfulness to mention
characteristics of any nation and sect which are also found in others.
18,1 Ebion too preached in Asia and Rome, but the roots of these
thorny side-growths come mostly from Nabataea and Banias, Moabitis,
and Cocabe in Bashanitis beyond Adrai—in Cyprus as well. (2) They
compel them to give their children in marriage even when they are too
young—with the permission of their teachers, if you please! (Ebionites have
elders and heads of synagogues, and they call their church a synagogue, not
a church; and they take pride in Christ’s name only.) (3) And they do not
allow people to contract only one marriage; even if someone should want
to be released from his first marriage and contract another, they permit
it—they allow everything without hesitation—down to a second, and a
third, and a seventh marriage.
18,4 They acknowledge Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, Moses and
Aaron—and Joshua the son of Nun44 simply as Moses’ successor, though
he is of no importance. But after these they acknowledge no more of the
prophets, but even anathematize David and Solomon and make fun of
them. Similarly they disregard Isaiah and Jeremiah, Daniel and Ezekiel,
Elijah and Elisha; for they pay them no heed and blaspheme their prophecies,45 but accept only the Gospel. (5) They say, however, that Christ is the
prophet of truth46 and the Christ; < but > is Son of God by promotion,47
and by union with the elevation on high which has come to him. They
say that the prophets are prophets of < their own > understanding, not of
truth. (6) Christ alone, they would have it, is prophet, man, Son of God,
and Christ—and as I said before he is a mere man48 who has come to be
called Son of God owing to the virtue of his life.
18,7 Nor do they accept Moses’ Pentateuch in its entirety; they reject
certain sayings.49 When you say to them, of eating meat, “Why did Abraham serve the angels the calf and the milk? Why did Noah eat meat, and
why was he told to by God, who said, ‘Slay and eat?’ Why did Isaac and
Jacob sacrifice to God—Moses too, in the wilderness?” he will disbelieve
those things and will say, “What need for me to read what is in the Law,
when the Gospel has come?”
18,8 “Well, how do you know about Moses and Abraham? I know
you admit that they exist, and that you put them down as righteous, and
your own ancestors.”
18,9 Then he will answer, “Christ has revealed this to me,” and will
blaspheme most of the legislation, and Samson, David, Elijah, Samuel,
Elisha and the rest.
19,1 But the tramp is completely exposed by the Savior, who refutes the
whole of his deceitful teaching, expressly and as though in summary form
with one utterance, when he says, “John came in the way of righteousness,
neither eating nor drinking, and they say, He hath a devil. The Son of Man
came eating and drinking, < and they say, Behold a man gluttonous and
a wine-bibber.” >50 (2) And he certainly does not mean that John never by
any chance ate, or that the Savior ate anything and everything—with the
suspicion of forbidden foods as well. (3) The passage makes the meaning
of the truth plain, since “He is a glutton and a wine-bibber” can mean
only the eating of meat and the drinking of wine; and “neither eating nor
drinking” means that John did not partake of meat and wine, but only of
locusts and honey—water too, obviously.
19,4 But who does not know that the Savior arose from the dead and
ate (flesh)? As the holy Gospels of the truth say, “There was given unto
him bread, and a piece of broiled fish. And he took it, and did eat, and
gave to his disciples.”51 As he also did at the Sea of Tiberias, both eating
and giving. (5) And a great deal can be said on this subject. But I must
now come to the detailed refutation of their worthless, unsound teachings,
and compose the rebuttal of them.
20,1 And first, it must be said of Christ that he is not a mere man. It
cannot be that a person conceived < like > a man in every respect will be
given to the world for a “sign,” as the Holy Spirit foretold of him by saying to Ahaz, “Ask thee a sign”; and since Ahaz would not ask, the prophet
then said, “The Lord himself shall give you a sign. Behold the Virgin shall
conceive.”52
20,2 A woman who has been united to a husband and married cannot be called a virgin. But she who has truly had the conception of the
Word of God without a husband may properly be called a virgin—(3) as
Isaiah himself says in another passage, “A voice of a cry from the city, a
voice from the temple, a voice of the Lord of recompense, that rendereth
recompense to his enemies. Before she that travailed hath brought forth,
before the pain of her travail came, she escaped (it) and was delivered of
a man child. Who hath heard of such a thing? Or who hath seen such
things? Or hath the earth travailed in one day and brought forth a nation
at once? For Zion hath travailed and brought forth her children. And it
was I who granted this expectation, and they did not remember, saith the
Lord.”53 (4) But which “expectation” and which “children,” other than that
of a virgin’s giving birth (to a child) without labor pains, something that
had never happened, and that the child born of Elizabeth by promise for
his sake < leaped in the womb before his birth >, even though John was
born with labor pains.
20,5 How, then, can these people declare the Savior a mere man,
conceived of a man’s seed? How will he “not be known,” as Jeremiah says
of him, “He is a man, and yet who will know him?”54 (6) For in giving
his description the prophet said of him, “Who will know him?” But if he
were speaking of a mere man, surely his father would know him and his
mother, his relatives and neighbors, the members of his household and his
fellow townsmen. (7) But since the human offspring is born of Mary but
the divine Word came from above, truly begotten not in time and without
beginning, not of a man’s seed but of the Father on high, and in the last
days consenting to enter a virgin’s womb and fashioning flesh from her,
patterned after himself—this is why Jeremiah says, “And he is a man, but
who will know him?”55 For as God he came from above, the only-begotten
divine Word.
20,8 But the deluded souls are most unfortunate to have abandoned
the testimonies of prophets and angels and to be content with those of
the deluded Ebion, who wants to do what he likes, and practice the Jewish
cusoms even though he is estranged from the Jews. (9) < For > when Gabriel
was bringing the tidings to Mary, he pledged his word at once as soon as
she said, “How shall this be, seeing I know not a man?” and said, “The
Spirit of the Lord shall come upon thee, and the power of the highest shall
overshadow thee. Therefore also that which is born of thee shall be called
holy, Son of God.”56 (10) By saying, “that which is born,” he showed that
the flesh < is > from her and the rest of the humanity, but that the power
of the highest and the Holy Spirit overshadowed the holy Virgin from
above, from the heavens, and the only-begotten Son, the divine Word, has
descended from on high—< indicating > both that Christ became man,
and that he was born of her in truth. (11) And how much more there is
of this sort! But as I promised it is not my custom to range widely, so as
not to make my treatise very lengthy.
21,1 But next I shall discuss the other false accusations which they
make, against Peter and the other apostles—that every day, before so much
as eating bread, Peter had had immersions. (2) Observe the whole of their
slander, and the badness hidden under their cheap teaching! Since they
are defiled themselves and often indulge themselves sexually on earth, they
make lavish use of water for their own reassurance, to deceive themselves
if you please, under the impression that they have purification through
baptisms. (3) And they are not ashamed to say these offensive things about
the apostles, even though the Lord exposes their perversity since, when he
came to wash Peter’s feet, Peter said, “Thou shalt never wash my feet,”
and the Savior’s answer was, “If I wash not thy feet thou hast no part with
me.” (4) And when Peter replied, “Not the feet only, but also the head,”
the Lord returned, “He that is washed once needeth not < to wash > his
head, but his feet only; for he is clean every whit.”57
21,5 He showed, then, that there is no need to make use of immersions, useless customs, and commandments and teachings of men, as he
says in the Gospel in agreement with the prophet, “This people honoreth
me with their lips, but their heart is far from me. But in vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.”58 (6) Why
did he fault the Pharisees and Scribes, with their thorough immersions
< both > of themselves, and of their platters, cups and the rest? And why
does he declare definitively, “To eat with unwashen hands defileth not a
man?”59 Thus not only did he put a stop to the immersion of these things.
He even showed that washing one’s hands is unnecessary, and that if one
would rather < not > wash his hands, it does him no harm.
22,1 And how can their stupidity about the eating of meat not be
exposed out of hand? First of all, because the Lord ate the Jewish Passover.
Now the Jewish Passover was a sheep and unleavened bread—sheep’s flesh
roasted with fire and eaten, (2) as his disciples say to him, “Where wilt
thou that we prepare for thee that thou mayest eat the Passover?” And the
Lord himself says, “Go ye into the city, and ye shall find a man bearing
a pitcher of water and ye shall follow whithersoever he goeth, and say ye
to the goodman of the house, Where is the guest-chamber, where I shall
keep the Passover with my disciples? And he shall show you an upper room
furnished; there make ready.”60
22,3 And again, the Lord himself says, “With desire I have desired to
eat this Passover with you.”61 And he did not simply say “Passover” but
“this Passover,” so that no one could play with it in his own sense. A Passover, as I said, was meat roasted with fire and the rest. (4) But to destroy
deliberately the true passage these people have altered its text—which is
evident to everyone from the expressions that accompany it62—and represented the disciples as saying, “Where wilt thou that we prepare for thee
to eat the Passover?” and he supposedly saying, “Did I really desire to eat
meat as this Passover with you?”
22,5 But how can their tampering go undetected, when the passage
cries out that the “mu” and “eta” are additions? Instead of saying ἐπιθυμίᾳ
ἐπεθύμησα they have put in the additional μή. Christ truly said, “With desire
I have desired to eat this Passover with you.”63 But they misled themselves
by writing in meat and making a false entry, and saying, “Did I really want
to eat meat with you as this Passover?” But it is plainly demonstrated that
he both kept the Passover, and, as I said, ate meat.
22,6 But they will also be convicted by the vision which was shown
St. Peter, through the sheet which contained all sorts of wild beasts, domestic animals, reptiles and birds, and the Lord’s voice saying, “Arise, slay and
eat!” And when Peter said, “Not so, Lord; nothing common or unclean
hath entered into my mouth,” the Lord replied, “What God hath cleansed,
that call not thou common.”64 (7) For the proof of the truth can be arrived
at by two methods. If they say that St. Peter’s remark refers inclusively
to all foods when he says, “Nothing common or unclean < hath > at any
time < entered into my mouth >,” so that he would have called cattle,
goats, sheep and birds unclean, they will be exposed at once by his previous mode of life. (8) It was after marrying, fathering children65 and having
a mother-in-law that he met the Savior, and he was Jewish. But Jews eat
flesh, and among them the eating of meat is not considered abominable
or forbidden. (9) Since he had always eaten meat, then—even if we say
(he did it only) until he met the Savior—this will prove that he considered
nothing unclean which was not declared to be unclean. For in fact he did
not attribute commonness or uncleanness to all sorts of meat, but (only)
to the ones the Law called common or unclean.
22,10 But again—since it is established that he did not hold of all
kinds of meat that they were all common, but that he held this of the
kinds which are called common and unclean in the Law—to teach him
the character of Christ’s holy church God told him to consider nothing
common. “For all things are pure, when they are received with thanks and
praise to God.”66 (11) But even though the riddle referred to the call of the
gentiles so that Peter would not regard the uncircumcised as profane or
unclean, the expression Peter used did not refer to people but meant the
foods the Law prohibits, as anyone can see. And their silly argument has
failed from every point of view.
23,1 They pretendedly accept the names of the apostles in order to
convince their dupes, and have composed forged books in their names, supposedly by James, Matthew, and other disciples. (2) They list the name of
the apostle John among these to make their stupidity detectible in every way.
For not only does he refute them in every way by saying, “In the beginning
was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.”67
(3) < It is clear from his Gospel >, moreover, that he < accepts > the testimonies of the holy prophets. In this Gospel he published their testimonies by
giving a good and full account, with the Holy Spirit’s help, of the things
the Savior said about each oracle (of the prophets) which, as I said, has
been fulfilled in Christ. From these prophets the Ebionites have estranged
themselves. (4) At the very outset he showed how John himself answered the
messengers sent by the Pharisees to John the Baptist with, “I am the voice
of one crying in the wilderness, Make straight the way of the Lord, as said
the prophet Isaiah.”68 (5) And again, when the Lord overturned the tables
of the money-changers and said, “Make not my Father’s house an house
of merchandise,’’ John himself, taking the testimony from the prophets, I
mean from David, said, “They remembered that it was written, The zeal
of thine house hath eaten me up.”69 And again, John himself said, “Isaiah
saw, being in the Holy Spirit.”70
24,1 And again, when St. John himself was preaching in Asia, it is
reported that he did an extraordinary thing as an example of the truth.
Although his way of life was most admirable and appropriate to his apostolic
rank and he never bathed, he was compelled to approach the bath by the
Holy Spirit who said, “Look what is at the bath!” (2) To his companions’
surprise he actually went to the bathing-room, approached the attendant
who took the bathers’ clothes, and asked who was inside in the bathingroom. (3) And the attendant stationed there to watch the clothes—some
people do this for a living in the gymnasia—said to St. John, “Ebion is
inside.” (4) But John understood at once why the Holy Spirit’s guidance
had impelled him to approach the bath, as I said—as a memorial to leave
us the truth’s advice as to who Christ’s servants and apostles are, and the
sons of that same truth, but what the vessels of the evil one are, and the
gates of hell; though these cannot prevail against the rock, and God’s holy
church which is founded on it. (5) Becoming disturbed at once and crying
out John said in an aside audible to all—as a testimony in evidence of
undefiled doctrine—“Let’s get out of here in a hurry, brothers, or the bath
may fall and bury us along with the person who is inside in the bathingroom, Ebion, because of his impiety.” (6) And no one need be surprised
to hear that Ebion met John. The blessed John had a very long life, and
survived till the reign of Trajan.71 (7) But anyone can see that all the apostles
distinguished Ebion’s faith (from their own), and considered it foreign to
the character of their preaching.
25,1 And how much do I have to say about their blasphemies of
St. Paul? First, they say that he was Greek and of gentile parentage, but
that he had later become a proselyte. (2) Why does he say “an Hebrew
of Hebrews” of himself, then, “of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of
Benjamin, concerning the Law, a Pharisee, being more exceeding zealous of the traditions of my fathers?”72 (3) And he says elsewhere, “Are
they Israelites? So am I. Are they the seed of Abraham? So am I,”73 and,
“Circumcised the eighth day, brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, and an
Hebrew of Hebrews.”74
25,4 What frightful shrieks and snake’s hisses of the horrid serpents,
and what deadly nonsense! Whose word shall I take? Ebion’s and his kind,
or St. Peter’s, who says, “As my brother, Paul, hath written unto you, which
things are deep and hard to be understood, which they who are unlearned
and unstable pervert by their own ignorance?”75 (5) And St. Paul himself
testifies in his turn for Peter and says, “James, John and Cephas, who seemed
to be pillars, gave to me and Barnabas the right hand of fellowship.”76 For
even if he said that he was from Tarsus, this is no excuse for the attitude
of those who hunt for words < that they have invented > to their own ruin
and the ruin of < their > converts. (6) For that matter, scripture also says
that Barnabas, whose name was once Joseph but was changed to Barnabas,
or “son of consolation,” was a Levite from Cyprus. And it is by no means
true that, because he was a Cypriote, he was not descended from Levi. Just
so, even though St. Paul came from Tarsus, he was not foreign to Israel.
25,7 For since many were dispersed when there was war during the
reign of Antiochus Epiphanes and at other times, both by being taken
prisoner, and by < fleeing because of > a siege, those who had been taken
captive remained in certain places, while everyone who had left for some
such reason settled where he could. (8) And so the holy Jeremiah said of
Israel because it was so often that they had to flee from their enemies, “And
if thou passest over to the Citians, there also shalt thou have no rest.”77
(9) Now anyone can see that Citium means the island of Cyprus, for Cypriotes and Rhodians are Citians. Moreover, the Cypriote and Rhodian stock
had settled in Macedonia where Alexander of Macedon came from. And
this is why the Book of Maccabees says, “He came out of the land of the
Citians”;78 Alexander of Macedon was of Citian descent.
25,10 But to find my place again after giving the information about
them because of the chance remark,79 I am saying that many of the emigrants who had settled in the other countries had Israelite ancestry. (11) For
they were called natives of each country besides. Thus Jethro’s daughters
told their father how Moses had helped them when he drove the shepherds
away and watered their sheep. And they went and told their father about
it, and when he said, “How is it that ye are come so soon today?” (12) they
answered, “An Egyptian delivered us from the shepherds, and also drew
water for us and watered our flock.” And Jethro answered at once, “Why
brought ye him not hither, that he may eat bread?”80
25,13 But who does not know that Moses was the son of Amram and
Jochabed, Amram was the son of Kohath, Kohath of Levi, Levi of Jacob,
Jacob of Isaac, and Isaac of Abraham? And the line of his noble stock and
his descent had surely not died out because Moses is called “Egyptian.’’
(14) But these people whom Ebion has led astray have left the road and
set their minds on many crooked ways and an uphill path.
26,1 Again, they are proud of having circumcision,81 and boast, if you
please, that this is the sign and mark of the patriarchs and the righteous
men who have lived by the Law; and they think that it makes them their
equals. And indeed they want to give the proof of this from Christ himself,
as Cerinthus did. (2) Echoing his silly argument they too say, “ ‘It is enough
for the disciple that he be as his master.’ Christ was circumcised; you be
circumcised too!”82
26,383 . . . and that the seeds of the imposture may be discredited in
every way. As the sea has a bridle, bars, and gates determined by God; as
it has sand for a boundary, and for a commandment, “Hitherto shalt thou
come, but no further; in thyself shall thy waves be shattered,”84 < as > he
says—so they will be exhausted within themselves. (4) But there the words
about the boundary have been said by God for the ordering of the sea by
God’s command. Here, however, wickedness, and the imposture that blinds
the mind and perverts pious reason, has of itself raised waves against itself
beforehand, as it were. It smashes against the harshnesses of its previous
pronouncements with other waves of its own opinion, and is constantly
being shattered within itself < and > destroying itself.
26,5 Or it is like a horrid serpent which savages itself and becomes
its own destruction by bending round from the tail and devouring itself.
(6) They say this used to be done by asps which had been sealed up in jars,
and when each had destroyed the other the strongest and and fiercest survived. But when it was left alone and got hungry, certain Egyptian naturalists
report that it would eat itself up, beginning with its own tail. Hence they
also named this appropriately and from the Gorgon’s head called this too
an “aspidogorgon.”85 (7) So the lame-brained Ebion and his circle have cut
themselves up beforehand, and from the outset destroyed the very things of
which they are proud. (8) For Christ did not circumcise himself, since he
was born as a child. But glory to the merciful God! To avoid admitting the
truth Ebion has anticipated himself, so that this even becomes a refutation
for him. (9) If he said that Christ had come down from heaven as God
and been circumcised by Mary on the eighth day, then—since, as God, he
would be allowing this of his own consent—this would provide the tramp
with the persuasive argument for circumcision. But since he brings in the
idea that Christ, as a mere man, was generated by men, the child cannot
be responsible, even though he was circumcised the eighth day. (10) For he
did not circumcise himself, but was circumcised by men. Children do not
circumcise themselves and are not responsible for their own circumcision;
their parents are. They are unknowing, innocent babes, and neither do
they know what their parents are doing to them.
27,1 But we say that he both came from heaven as God and remained
in the Virgin Mary’s womb for the normal period of gestation, so as to
take his incarnate humanity entirely from the virgin womb, and provide the
dispensation in which he was also circumcised—truly, and not in appearance—on the eighth day. (2) “For he came to perfect the Law and prophets,
not to destroy them”86—not to declare the Law foreign to himself, but a
thing given by himself and continuing as a type until his coming. Thus the
deficiencies in the Law would in turn be perfected in him and by him so
that the types, come to spiritual perfection, might be preached in truth by
him and his apostles—no longer as types but as truth.
27,3 For in this the saying of the Law was fulfilled, one which had
stood until his time, and was abolished and yet brought to fulfillment in
him—the words of Zipporah, “The blood of the circumcision of my child
hath ceased to flow.”87 (4) And she did not say, “I was circumcising my
child”—the angel who was sent to her was not instituting circumcision, nor
did he leave for fear of the blood of circumcision. But in token of the Child
who would stanch the blood of circumcision < he was providing that she
would say, “The blood of my child hath ceased to flow” >. And on hearing
this and having made the provision, he went away. (5) And which child’s
blood, mark you, but the child’s of whom the prophet said, “They shall
wish that they were burned with fire. For unto us a child is born, unto us
a son is also given,”88 (6) truly referring to the child who was born to mean
his true incarnation; but (saying), “Unto us a son is given,” to show that
God’s Word from above and his Son himself had been given and become
man by entering the womb—both human and divine, himself God, himself
man; himself a Son given from above, himself a child (humanly) born.
27,7 With this child the blood of circumcision finally ceased to flow,
as he says in the Gospel—when Greeks arrived to see him, approached
Philip, and told him, “Show us Jesus,” and Philip told John (sic) and John
told Jesus, “Certain Greeks desire to see thee.”89 (8) And the Lord replied
at once, “Now hath come the glory of God,” to show that physical circumcision, which had served for a while as a type, was passing away, but
that uncircumcision in the flesh possesses a greater circumcision in spirit,
since it sees Christ and has comprehended him in truth.
28,1 But if these people choose to say, “Then why was Christ circumcised?”—you misguided souls, I have already told you the reason he was
circumcised! He was circumcised for many reasons. (2) First, to prove that
< he had > really < taken > flesh, because of Manichaeus and those who
say he been manifested (only) in appearance. (3) Then, to show that the
body was not consubstantial with the Godhead as Apollinarius says, and
that he had not brought it down from above as Valentinus says. (4) And
to confirm the circumcision which he had given of old and which had
served a legitimate purpose until his arrival; and so that the Jews would
have no excuse. For if he had not been circumcised they could have said,
“We cannot accept an uncircumcised Christ.’’
28,5 And besides, after commanding Abraham to be circumcised—circumcised as a visible seal but in token of the true and invisible seal that he
had been given—Christ needed to confirm this by being circumcised (himself ). (6) For the visible circumcision was instituted because of Abraham’s
doubt, when the holy and righteous man said, as though in doubt, “Shall
a son be born unto him that is an hundred years old?” and, “Shall Sarah
in her old age bear a son?”90 And the Lord said at once, “Take me a ram
three years old, and a goat, and an heifer,”91 and so on, and about sundown,
when Abraham saw burning torches, an oven and the rest, (7) and after
God reprovingly told him, for a safeguard, “Thy seed shall be a stranger
in a land that is not theirs, and they shall enslave them for four hundred
years,”92 because of the doubt that had led Abraham to say, “Shall a son
be born to him that is an hundred years old?”93 he imposed physical circumcision on him and his, to keep them from forgetting the God of their
fathers after they had been enslaved by idolatrous, unbelieving Egyptians.
Thus they would see their circumcision, be reminded and feel abashed,
and not deny him.
28,8 And this remained the case until Christ, and because of it he
himself consented to be circumcised, and became true man; though he had
come from above from the Father as the divine Word, and did not doff
the Godhead but truly wore flesh. (9) He was circumcised in the possession of full humanity, making all his provisions in truth—so that the Jews
would have no excuse, as I said, and the Manichaeans and others would
be refuted and so that, being circumcised himself, he could with reason
abolish circumcision and show that another kind was greater. It was not
as though he had no circumcision and was making one up for himself. He
had one, but showed that there is no further need of this circumcision, but
of the greater one.
29,1 And that he was God as soon as he was born and not a mere
man, the magi will plainly show. For after a period of two years—as they
told Herod the time the star had risen, “two years ago at the most”94—they
came to Jerusalem. And on learning by inquiry that Christ must be born
in Bethlehem, these same magi left again with the star guiding them, and
came from Jerusalem to Bethlehem. (2) And they went in and found him
with his mother Mary, and fell down and worshiped him and offered their
gifts. (3) Now if he is worshiped at the outset, the child who has been born
is not a mere man at birth, but is God and does not become Christ thirty
years later, and not after the baptism, but was born as Christ of a virgin,
God and man. (4) And thus the angels hymn him at once with, “Glory
to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good-will among men,”95 and
give the shepherds tidings, “Unto you is born this day, in the city of David,
Christ the Lord.”96
29,5 And this is not the only proof, you deluded Ebion! Moreover,
when he has turned twelve he is found “sitting in the midst of the priests
and elders, both questioning them and disputing with them,”97 and “They
were amazed at the gracious discourse which proceeded out of his mouth.”98
(6) And it was not after his thirtieth year that he was doing this, allowing you
to say he became Christ when the Spirit had come to him, but right at the
age of twelve as I said, as it is written in the Gospel according to Luke.
29,7 But even earlier too when, during his childhood, when Joseph
and Mary went up to Jerusalem to worship at the feast and started back,
Jesus stayed behind. And they looked for him on the road and among their
relatives—Mary had relatives—and could not find him. (8) But she went
back and found him, and said, “Son, what hast thou done to us? Behold,
thy father and I have sought thee sorrowing.” ( Joseph was in the position of
father to him, for he was not his actual father.) (9) Then the Lord answered
her, “Why is it that ye sought me? Wist ye not that I must be in my Father’s
house?”99 indicating that the Temple had been built in the name of God,
that is, of his own Father. (10) Now if he knew the Temple and his Father
from childhood, Jesus was not a mere man when he was born and he was
not called Christ and Son (only) after his thirtieth year, after the form of
the dove had come to him. Instead he was teaching, even at once and with
full assurance, that he had to be in his Father’s house.
29,11 And for proof that Joseph was not his father but < was > in the
position of father, hear how the same evangelist—the one who quotes Mary
as saying, “Thy father and I have sought thee sorrowing”100—writes in turn,
“And Jesus began to be about thirty years of age, being, as was supposed, the
son of Joseph.”101 By saying, “as was supposed,” he showed that Jesus was
not his son, but was supposed to be.
30,1 But the time is going to run short for my discussion in proof of the
truth and in refutation of Ebion’s weak-mindedness and his phony school
of weak-mindedness. (2) What does not make it plain that Joseph was not
father to Jesus, but was held to be in the position of father? “Behold,”
scripture says, “the Virgin shall conceive and bear a son”;102 it didn’t say,
“Behold, the wife!” (3) And again, it says in another place, “And the heifer
shall bear, and they shall say, It hath not borne.”103 Some Manichaeans
and Marcionites say that Jesus was not born—hence, “She shall bear, and
they shall say, She hath not borne.” For Mary has not given birth because
of a man’s seed, and these people104 madly tell the lie that she has given
birth because of a man’s seed. The heifer, then, has in truth borne God,
in truth borne man.
30,4 And to show that the Virgin is called “heifer” and that what was
left by this heifer was a purification of the defiled, hear the Law saying,
“Take thee a fiery-red heifer,”105 indicating the chosen vessel of Mary < by
saying, “Take thee an heifer.” But it says, “fiery-red,” > because of the fieriness of the Savior’s Godhead that was contained in the Virgin; for “God,”
says scripture, “is a consuming fire.”106 (5) And the Law says, “a fiery-red
heifer upon whose neck hath never come yoke,”107 to show that the Virgin,
who does not know the yoke of marriage to a husband, is a “heifer.”
30,6 But why am I giving most of the arguments? As Isaiah, again,
said in the person of the Lord, “Take unto thee a sheet cut from a great,
new papyrus-roll”108—“sheet” because the Virgin is the product of a man’s
seed but has been cut off from union with men and separated from natural
human behavior. (7) For all human beings are generated by man’s seed.
But while Christ’s generation had its humanity naturally from a woman,
the Virgin Mary, it was cut off unnaturally from the human line of descent
as Jacob says of him, “Thou didst come up, my son, from a shoot.”109
And he didn’t say, “Thou didst come up from a seed.” (8) And for this
reason the holy Isaiah the prophet says, or rather, the Lord says to him,
“Take thee a sheet (cut from) a papyrus-roll,”110 giving a symbol of sexual
intercourse, the way in which men write their entire record. As it also says
in the hundred and thirty-eighth psalm, “In thy book shall all be written;
they shall be fashioned in a day, and no one is in them,”111 for it likened
the womb to a book.
30,9 This is why David says, “Thine eyes did see my unbaked substance.”112 That is, he said, “You knew me after I was conceived but
before I was formed; and even earlier, before my conception.” (31,1) But
the Hebrew author makes the expression marvelously clear. He called
the “unbaked substance” a “golem,” which means a grain or granule of
flour—something which has not yet come together into a loaf and been
kneaded, but is like a particle or fleck detached from a grain of wheat, or
the tiny speck that is left by fine flour. (2) Thus he precisely represented
a thing of the same shape, the particle that is detached from a man for
insemination, and said—giving the expression in Greek translation—“the
unbaked substance.” In other words, he said, “ ‘Thine eyes did see’ the
unformed substance still in the womb, or before the womb”—“God knoweth
all things before they be,”113 as scripture says. But what is meant by “book”
and “sheet” is “womb.”
31,3 And he did not say, “Take thee a roll,” or, “Take thee papyrus,”
but “a piece”—contrary to people’s characteristic custom—because of the
likeness of the womb to a place for writing. He said, “new,” because of
the newness and spotlessness of the Virgin. (4) And < “great” >; for great
indeed is Mary, the holy Virgin, before God and man! How can we not
call her “great,” when she contained the Uncontainable, whom heaven
and earth cannot contain? Yet he, though uncontainable, was contained
by his own choice and consent, willingly and not of necessity. Great, then,
is the “sheet of papyrus,” and new! Great, because of the marvel; new,
because virgin.
31,5 “And write on it,” he says, “with a man’s pen.”114 And he didn’t
say, “Someone will write on it with a man’s pen”; and he didn’t say, “A
man will write on it” either, so that Ebion would find no opportunity. If
he had said, “A man will write on it,” Ebion could say that a man, Joseph,
sowed, and that Christ was generated from the seed of a man. (6) But he
said, “Write!” to Isaiah about 753 years before the event, so that the truth
would be apparent to everyone from the length of the interval—since no
one could have sired the child who was to be born, 753 years ahead of
time. (7) Then did he say, “Write!” to the prophet for no good reason? No,
but to show that the Holy Spirit, who was in the prophet, would himself
truly become the agent of the incarnate Christ’s conception. For, “The
Holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and so on”115 said the angel Gabriel to
Mary. (8) But “with a man’s pen” means, “in the image of a man.” “For
Christ Jesus is man, but he is mediator between God and men,”116 since
he came from on high as divine Word but from Mary as man, though not
begotten of man’s seed.
31,9 And this is why the prophet says at once, “And he went in unto the
prophetess,”117 to show that Mary is a prophetess—not Ahaz’s wife as some
mistakenly allege that this was said because of Hezekiah. (10) For Hezekiah
had already been born eleven years before. For it was in the third year of
his father’s reign that the prophecy, “Behold, the Virgin shall conceive,”118
was delivered. And after the death of Ahaz, who reigned for fourteen years
and (then) died, the scripture says at once, “And Hezekiah began to reign;
twenty < and five > years old was he when he began to reign.”119 (11) So
how could Hezekiah, (who reigned for twenty years after his father), be born
during the reign of his father, who reigned for fourteen years, because of
the prophecy that Emmanuel would be born of a virgin? Instead, will it
not be evident to the wise that Hezekiah had already been born when the
prophet delivered the oracle during the reign of Ahaz, Hezekiah’s father?
(12) Especially since Ahaz’s wife was not a prophetess, as anyone can see.
This is Mary, who said prophetically, “For from henceforth all generations
will call me blessed”;120 Mary, to whom Gabriel came with the tidings that
the Spirit who had spoken in Isaiah would come upon her and she would
bear a son, our Lord Jesus Christ, through the Holy Spirit—and not by the
seed of a man, as these people foolishly and erroneously blaspheme.
32,1 But both the lame-brain’s Sabbath observance and circumcision,
and the daily baptisms of which he makes use, stand discredited; for Jesus
made a point of healing mostly on the Sabbath. And it was not just that he
heals, but that he heals in two ways. (2) He directs the persons he has healed
to pick their mattresses up and walk. Moreover, on the Sabbath he made
clay and anointed the blind man’s eyes, but the making of clay is work.
(3) Hence, since the apostles had learned from their association with him
and from his teaching that the Sabbath had been abolished, they plucked
ears of grain on the Sabbath, rubbed them in their hands and ate them.
But it was a “second Sabbath after the first” as the Gospel indicates.
32,4 For the Law designated various Sabbaths. The Sabbath proper,
which recurs week by week. And the one that is a Sabbath because of the
occurrences every month of the new moons and of the successive feasts
such as the days of Tabernacles, and of Passover when they sacrifice the
lamb and then eat unleavened bread. Further, when they keep the single,
annual fast which is called the “Greater Fast,” and the other, which they call
the “Lesser.” (5) For when these days occur, on the second day of the week
or the third or the fourth, this too is designated a Sabbath for them.
32,6 Hence, after the Day of Unleavened Bread which had come and
been designated a Sabbath, on the Sabbath proper following the Day of
Unleavened Bread which was considered a Sabbath, the disciples were
found going through the standing grain, plucking the ears, and rubbing and
eating them. (7) They were proving that the prohibition which is fixed on
the Sabbath has been relaxed at the coming of the Great Sabbath—Christ,
who gave us rest from our sins, and of whom Noah was a type. On seeing
him at birth his father named him Noah by prophecy, and said, “He will
give us rest from our sins, or deeds of cruelty.”121
32,8 But Noah did not give any rest from sins. Lamech made the prophecy of Christ, whose meaning is truly Noah—“Noah” means “rest”—and
“Sebeth,” which means “rest and Sabbath.” (9) In other words, “Christ,”
in whom the Father and his Holy Spirit have rested, and all holy men have
found rest in him by desisting from sins. He is the great, eternal Sabbath,
of which the lesser, temporary Sabbath was a type. This served until his
coming, had been prescribed by him in the Law, and was abrogated, and
fulfilled in him, in the Gospel. For this is what he meant when he said,
“The Son of Man is Lord even of the Sabbath day.”122
32,10 Hence the disciples broke the Sabbath with confidence—since
even the priests before them used to break it in the Temple by sacrificing
and offering sacrifices to God, to keep the continual sacrifice that was offered
every day from coming to an end. And not only did the priests themselves
prophesy the Sabbath’s abrogation by not remaining idle; besides, circumcision itself broke the Sabbath.
32,11 For when a child was born on the Sabbath as one often was, there
was an abrogation of the Sabbath and of circumcision. Thus the dissolution of both was predicted. Obviously, if the ones who were to circumcise
the child which had been born on the Sabbath chose to be exact about the
eighth day, and they found that it fell on Sabbath and still circumcised
the child, they performed a work and broke the Sabbath. (12) But if they
put it off so as not to break the Sabbath, they then performed the circumcision on the ninth day, and violated circumcision itself, and its mandatory
term of eight days.
33,1 Nor was the first circumcision final. It was given for a sign, as a
reminder of things to come, and because of the holy Abraham’s doubts
when, as I said, he was reproved for them—and as a type of the Greater
Circumcision, which fulfills all things equally in those who are held worthy.
(2) If the previous circumcision had been for sanctification and the inher-
itance of the kingdom of heaven, Sarah would have been deprived of the
kingdom—and Rebecca, Leah, Rachel, Jochabed, Miriam the sister of
Moses, and all the holy women. They could not have inherited the kingdom
of heaven, since they could not have the circumcision of Abraham which,
as the Ebionites tell it, God had given him. But if these have not been
deprived of the kingdom of heaven though they have no circumcision, the
physical circumcision of today is of no force.
33,3 But why does Ebion boast of circumcision, when both the
idolaters and the Egyptian priests have it? Moreover the Saracens, also
called Ishmaelites, have circumcision, and the Samaritans, Idumaeans and
Homerites. Most of these do this, not because of a law, but from some
senseless custom.
33,4 And I will simply use a lot of time if I spend it on Ebion’s
nonsense, because of the way he pointlessly relies on the wording of the
Savior’s, “It is enough for the disciple that he be as his master,”123 for his
boast that his own circumcision derives from Christ’s—which was cut off
altogether in him and abolished through him! (5) Still, since the oaf takes
this saying of the imitation of Christ, I do not mind showing that it was
not said for this reason.
33,6 The Lord explains immediately that he did not say it for this
reason but because of persecutions and the way the Jews insulted him, and
he says, “If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you; if they
have hated me, they will hate you also.”124 “Call ye not me teacher and
Lord? And ye say well, for so I am.125 If they have called the master of the
house Beelzebul, how much more shall they call them of his household?”126
(7) And, “The servant cannot be above his lord, nor the disciple above his
teacher. But let the disciple be perfect in all things, as his teacher”127—in
other words, ready for persecution, defamation, and whatever may be
inflicted on him. (8) Hence St. Paul too said, “Be ye imitators of me, as
I also am of Christ.”128 And it was not that he imitated his Master in a
wrong way; he did not say, “I am God,” or, “I am the Son of God,” or, “I
am the divine Word.” For he says, “I am the least of the apostles,” and,
“He was seen of me also, as of one born out of due time.”129
34,1 But if you take this text of the imitation of Christ, Ebion, and
want to be as your teacher—or rather, as your Lord—in the circumcision
you have such silly ideas < about >, stop being like him in circumcision!
This will do you no good. The Lord has made it obsolete, as I have shown
plainly through many testimonies. (2) For he came and fulfilled it by giving
us the perfect circumcision of his mysteries—not of one member only, but
by sealing the entire body and cutting it off from sin. And not by saving one
portion of the people, males alone, but by truly sealing the entire Christian
people, men and women both, and < leading > them ungrudgingly < on >
to the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven. And not by providing the
seal defectively in weakness, to only one class, males alone; but by revealing
the kingdom of heaven to an entire people through his seal, his commandments, and his good teaching.
34,3 But if you want to be like the Lord, Ebion—that is, if you want
to be like the teacher—you are very wrong. Stop mimicking him in circumcision. Call Lazarus from the grave, or raise another dead man; cleanse
lepers or grant sight to the blind, or heal a paralytic from birth, if you can!
But you can’t because you are doing the opposite, imprisoned by unbelief,
chains of flesh, and insatiable demands of law. (4) Now if you cannot do
even these things—which you cannot, because of your wrong belief—I
deny < that you are > like Christ. You cannot become like God, for you are
a mortal man, and a deluded one. Nor can you call on Christ’s name for
miracles—and even if you do, you don’t succeed. (5) But if you ever did
manage to make a paralytic stand, since he had gotten up by the name of
Jesus he could get understanding from him too, so as not to tolerate your
Sabbath observance but < be able > to learn, from the name of his Healer,
“Take up thy bed and go unto thine house on the Sabbath day.130
34,6 But I have already said how each of them palms off something
different about Christ. Ebion himself did at one time, by saying that he
originated as a mere man from sexual intercourse. But at other times the
Ebionites who derive from him say that Christ has a heavenly power from
God, “the Son,” and that the Son puts Adam on and takes him off when
convenient. By the power of God I have refuted their various opinions.
34,7 But why should I spend any further time on tidal beaches by the
sea, which are flooded here and dry there, and fish are often stranded on
some of them and injure people’s feet when they cross their high parts
because of there being poisonous ones among them—I mean sting-rays,

sea-snakes, sharks and sea-eels—as I have just now said. (8) I shall leave this
spot in its turn, thanking God that I have also put this sect to flight, not
half-heartedly but even with a painstaking refutation. (9) But let us address
ourselves to others next, beloved, praying for God’s help, that he himself
may bring our undertakings to fulfillment through me.