4,1 One of them was Josephus—not the ancient Josephus, the author
and chronicler, but Josephus of Tiberias, < born > during the old age of
the Emperor Constantine of blessed memory. This Josephus was awarded
the rank of count by the Emperor himself, and was authorized to build a
church for Christ in Tiberias itself, and in Diocaesarea, Capernaum and
the other towns. He also suffered a great deal from the Jews themselves
before he came to the Emperor’s notice.
4,2 For this Josephus was counted as one of their men of rank. There
are such persons, < who > rank next after the patriarch and are called
“apostles.”17 They attend on the patriarch, and often stay with him day and
night without intermission, to give him counsel and refer points of law to
him. (3) Now the patriarch at that time was called Ellel. (I think that was
how Josephus pronounced his name, unless I am mistaken because of the
time). He was descended from the Gamaliel who had been one of their
patriarchs. (4) One may suspect, and others have suggested this as well,
that these patriarchs were descended from the first Gamaliel, the Savior’s
contemporary, who gave the godly counsel of refraining from abuse of
the apostles.
4,5 When Ellel was dying he asked for the bishop who then lived near
Tiberias, and received holy baptism from him in extremis for a pretendedly
medical reason. (6) For he had sent for him by Josephus, as though he were
a doctor, and he had the room cleared and begged the bishop, “Give me
the seal in Christ!” (7) The bishop summoned the servants and ordered
water prepared, as though intending to give the patriarch, who was very
sick, some treatment for his illness with water. They did what they were told,
for they did not know. And sending everyone out from pretended modesty
the patriarch was vouchsafed the laver and the holy mysteries.
5,1 Josephus told me < this > in conversation. For I heard all this from
his own lips and not from anyone else, in his old age when he was about
70 or even more. (2) For I was entertained at his home in Scythopolis; he
had moved from Tiberias, and owned a notable estate there in Scythopolis.
Eusebius of blessed memory, the bishop of Vercelli in Italy, was Josephus’
guest, since he had been banished by Constantius for his orthodox faith.
I and the other brethren had come there to visit him, and we were entertained too, along with Eusebius.
5,3 Now when I met Josephus at his home, asked him about himself,
and found that he had been a prominent Jew, I also inquired his reason,
and why it was that he had come over to Christianity. And I heard all this
plainly (from him), not at secondhand from anyone else. (4) And since I
think that, because of the Hebrew translations in the treasuries, the things
the man went through are worth recording for the edification of the faithful, I deliberately give Josephus’ entire reason.
5,5 Josephus was not only privileged to become a faithful Christian,
but a great despiser of Arians as well. In that city, I mean Scythopolis, he
was the only orthodox Christian—they were all Arians. (6) Had it not been
that he was a count, and the rank of count protected him from Arian persecution, he could not even have undertaken to live in the town, especially
while Patrophilus was the Arian bishop. Patrophilus was very influential
because of his wealth and severity, and his familiar acquaintance with the
Emperor Constantius. (7) But there was another, younger man in town
too, an orthodox believer of Jewish parentage. He did not even dare < to
associate > with me in public, though he used to visit me secretly.
5,8 But Josephus told me something plausible and amusing, though I
would think that even < here > he was telling the truth. He claimed that
after his wife died, fearing that the Arians might take him by force and
make him a cleric—to flatter him into conversion to the sect they would
often promise him higher preferments if need be, and to make him a
bishop. Well, he claimed that this was why he had married a second wife,
to escape their ordinations!
6,1 But I shall go back to telling the story of the patriarch and make
Josephus’ own story known in all its particulars to those who care to read
it, in the words he used to me. (2) “Just as the patriarch was being granted
baptism,” he told me, “I was peeping in through the cracks in the doors
and realized what the bishop was doing to the patriarch—found it out,
and kept it to myself. (3) For besides,” Josephus said, “the patriarch had
a very ample sum of money ready, and he reached out, gave it to the
bishop, and said, ‘Offer it for me. It is written that things are bound and
loosed on earth through the priests of God, and < that > these things will
be loosed and bound in heaven.’18 (4) When this was over,” he said, “and
the doors were opened, the patriarch’s visitors asked him how he was after
his treatment, and he replied that he was very well For he knew what he
was talking about!”
6,5 Then < after > two or three days, with the bishop visiting him often
in the guise of a physician, the patriarch fell asleep with a good hope in
store. He had entrusted his own son, who was quite young, to Josephus
and another very capable < elder >. (6) All business, then, was transacted
through these two, since the patriarch, being a boy, was still childish, and
was being brought up under their supervision.
6,7 During this time Josephus’ mind was often troubled over the
rites that had been performed in the affair of the baptism, and he was
considering what he should do. Now there was a “gazophylacium” there
which was sealed—“gaza” means “treasure” in Hebrew. (8) As many had
different notions about this treasury because of its seal, Josephus plucked
up the courage to open it unobserved—and found no money, but books
money could not buy. (9) Browsing through them he found the Gospel
of John translated from Greek to Hebrew, as I said, and the Acts of the
Apostles—and Matthew’s Gospel moreover, which is actually Hebrew.
After reading from them he was once more distressed in mind, for he was
somehow troubled over the faith of Christ. But now he was prodded for
two reasons, his reading of the books and the patriarch’s initiation. Still,
as often happens, his heart was hardened.
7,1 While all his time was occupied with these things, the boy Ellel
had left to be reared as patriarch was growing up. (No one usurps the positions of authority among the Jews, but son succeeds father.) (2) Just as the
lad was reaching full vigor some idle youths of his own age with vicious
habits unfortunately met him. (I guess he was called Judas, but because of
the time I am not quite sure.) (3) His young contemporaries got him into
many evil practices, seductions of women and unholy sexual unions. They
undertook to help him in his licentious < activities > with certain magic
devices—making certain love-philtres and compelling free women with
incantations to be brought under duress for his seduction.
7,4 Josephus and his fellow elder, who were obliged to attend the boy,
bore this with difficulty and often both charged him and admonished him
verbally. But he preferred to listen to the young men, and he hid his indecencies and denied them. And Josephus did not dare to voice his accusations
of him openly; instead he admonished him, as though for his education.
7,5 Well, they went to Gadara for the hot baths. There is a gathering
there every year. Persons who wish to bathe for a certain number of days
arrive from every quarter supposedly to get rid of their ailments, though
this is a trick of the devil. For where wonders have been given by God
the adversary has already spread his deadly nets—the bathing there is
mixed!
7,6 There happened to be a free woman of unusual beauty in the
bath. Lured by the habit of his licentiousness the young man rubbed his
side against the woman’s as he strolled about in the hot-air room. (7) But
being Christian, she naturally made the sign of the cross. (There was no
need for her to behave improperly and bathe in mixed company. These
things happen to simple lay persons, from the laxity of the teachers who
do not forewarn them through their instruction.) (8) Still, that God might
make his wonders manifest, the youngster, I mean the patriarch, failed in
his enterprise. For he sent emissaries to the woman and promised her gifts;
but she insulted his messengers and did not yield to the pampered youth’s
futile efforts.
8,1 Then, when his helpers learned of the boy’s pain which he betrayed
for the girl, they undertook to prepare more powerful magic for him, as
Josephus himself described it to me in full. (2) After sunset they took the
unfortunate lad to the neighboring cemetery. (In my country there are
places of assembly of this kind, called “caverns,” made by hewing them
out of cliff sides.) (3) Taking him there the cheats who accompanied him
recited certain incantations and spells, and did very impious things to him
and in the name of the woman.
8,4 By God’s will this came to the attention of the other elder, Josephus’
partner, and on realizing what was happening, he told Josephus. And he
began by bemoaning his lot, and said, “Brother, we are wretched men and
vessels of destruction! What sort of person are we attending?” (5) And when
Josephus asked the reason, no sooner were the words out of his mouth than
the elder seized his hand and took Josephus to the place where the persons
doomed to die, with the youth, were holding their assembly in the cemetery
for magic. (6) Standing outside the door they listened to what the others
were doing, but withdrew when they came out. (It was not dark yet; it was
just about sundown, and one could still see dimly.) (7) After the monsters
of impiety had left the tomb Josephus went in and saw certain < vessels >
and other implements of jugglery thrown on the ground. They made water
on them and covered them with a heap of dust, he said, and left.
8,8 But they knew the sort of woman on whose account they had
plotted these wicked things, and he watched to see whether they would
win. (9) When the sorcerers had not prevailed—the woman had the aid
of the sign and faith of Christ—he learned that the youngster had waited
for the girl’s arrival on three nights, and later quarreled with the persons
who had performed the jugglery because he had not succeeded. (10) This
made Josephus’ third lesson—where Christ’s name was, and the sign of
his cross, the power of sorcery did not prevail. But at this point he was by
no means convinced that he should become a Christian.
9,1 Then the Lord appeared to him in a dream, and said, “I am
Jesus, whom your forefathers crucified; but believe in me.” When he was
not convinced even by his he fell into grave illness and was given up for
lost. But the Lord appeared to him again, and told him to believe and he
would be healed. And he promised and recovered, and again persevered
in his obstinacy.
9,2 He fell ill a second time in turn, and was given up in the same
way. When he was assumed to be dying by his Jewish kin he heard the
words from them that they always repeat in secrecy among themselves.
(3) An elder, a scholar of the law, came and whispered to him, “Believe
< in > Jesus, crucified under Pontius Pilate the governor, Son of God first
yet later born of Mary; the Christ of God and risen from the dead. And
believe that he will come to judge and quick and the dead.” That same
Josephus told me this plainly during his story, as I can truthfully say.
9,4 Besides, I have heard this sort of thing from someone else. He
was still a Jew from fear of the Jews, but he often spent time in Christian
company, and he honored Christians and loved them. He traveled with
me in the wilderness of Bethel and Ephraim, when I was going up to the
mountains from Jericho and saying something to him about the advent of
Christ, and he did not dispute it. (5) I was amazed—he was learned in the
Law as well and able to argue—and I asked the reason why he did not
dispute, but agreed with me, about Jesus Christ our Lord. I had got no
further than this when he too revealed to me that when he himself had
been near death they had told him secretly, in a whisper, “Jesus Christ, the
crucified Son of God, will judge you.” (6) But let this be recorded here,
from a genuine report about these persons and about this formula.
10,1 Josephus was still sick. And though, as I said, the presbyter, along
with the others, had told him, “Jesus Christ will judge you,” he was still
hardened. But the Lord in his lovingkindness again said to him in a dream,
“Lo, I heal you; but rise and believe!” But though he recovered again, he
did not believe. (2) When he was well the Lord appeared to him in a dream
once more and scolded him for not believing. And he promised him, “If, for
an assurance of your faith, you choose to work any miracle in my name,
call upon me and I will do it.”
10,3 There was a madman in the city who used to roam the town, I
mean Tiberias, naked. If he was dressed he would often tear his clothing
apart, as such people will. (4) Now Josephus was overcome with awe and
wished to put the vision to the test, although he was still doubtful. So he
brought the man inside, shut the door, took water, made the sign of the
cross over it, and sprinkled it on the madman with the words, “In the name
of Jesus of Nazareth the crucified begone from him, demon, and let him
be made whole!”
10,5 Falling down with a loud cry, the man lay motionless for a long
time foaming profusely and retching, and Josephus supposed that he had
died. (6) But after a while he rubbed his forehead and got up and, once on
his feet and seeing his own nakedness, he hid himself and covered his privy
parts with his hands, for he could no longer bear to see his own nakedness.
(7) Dressed by Josephus himself in one of his own himatia, in proof of his
comprehension and sanity, he came and thanked him and God profusely,
for he realized that he had been cured through Josephus. He spread word
of him in town, and this miracle became known to the Jews there. (8) Much
talk ensued in the city from people saying that Josephus had opened the
treasuries, found the Name of God in writing and read it, and was working geat miracles. And what they were saying was true, though not in the
way they thought.
10,9 Josephus, however, still remained hardened in heart. But the merciful God who is continually arranging good opportunities for those who
love him, grants them to those whom he deems worthy of life. (11,1) As
things turned out for Josephus himself, after Judas the patriarch, of whom
we have spoken, grew up—I guess he was called that—to repay Josephus
he granted him the revenue of the apostolate. (2) He was sent to Cilicia
with a commission, and on arriving there collected the tithes and firstfruits
from the Jews of the province, from every city in Cilicia. (3) At this time
he lodged next to the church, I don’t know in which city. But he made
friends with the bishop there, < went to him > unobserved, borrowed the
Gospels and read them.
11,4 Since < he was > very severe as an apostle should be—as I said,
this is their name for the rank—and indeed was a reformer, he was always
intent on what would make for the establishment of good order and purged
and demoted many of the appointed synagogue-heads, priests, elders and
“azanites” (meaning their kind of deacons or assistants), many were angry
with him. As though in an attempt to pay him back these people took no
little trouble to pry into his affairs and find out what he was doing. (5) For
this reason a crowd of meddlers burst in upon him at home in his residence, and caught him pouring over the Gospels. They seized the book
and grabbed the man, dragged him to the floor with shouts, bore him off
to the synagogue with no light mistreatment, and beat him as the Law
prescribes. (6) This made his first trial; however, the bishop of the town
arrived and got him out. Another time they caught him on a journey, he
told me, and threw him into the river Cydnus. < When they saw > him
taken by the current they thought he had gone under and drowned, and
were glad of it.
11,7 But a little later he was vouchsafed holy baptism—for he was
rescued (from the river). He went to court, made friends with the Emperor
Constantine, and told him his whole story—how he was of the highest
Jewish rank, and how the divine visions kept appearing to him, since the
Lord was summoning him to his holy calling, and the salvation of his faith
and knowledge. (8) And the good emperor—a true servant of Christ, and,
after David, Hezekiah and Josiah, the king with the most godly zeal—
rewarded him with a rank in his realm, as I have said already. (9) He made
him a count and told him to ask what he wanted in his turn.
Josephus asked nothing of the emperor but this very great favor—permission by imperial rescript to build Christ’s churches in the Jewish towns
and villages where no one had ever been able to found churches, since
there are no Greeks, Samaritans or Christians among the population.
(10) This < rule > of having no gentiles among them is observed especially
at Tiberias, Diocaesarea, Sepphoris, Nazareth and Capernaum.
12,1 After receiving the letter and the authorization along with his title,
Josephus came to Tiberias. Besides, he had a draft on the imperial treasury,
and he himself had been honored with a salary from the emperor.
12,2 And so he began to build in Tiberias. There was a very large
temple in the town already, I think they may have called it the Adrianeum.
The citizens may have been trying to restore this Adrianeum, which was
standing unfinished, for a public bath. (3) When Josephus found this he
took the opportunity from it; and as he found that there were already four
walls raised to some height, made of stones four feet long, he began the
erection of the church from that point.
12,4 But lime was needed, and the other building material. He therefore had a number of ovens, perhaps seven altogether, set up outside the
city. (In the language of the country they call these “furnaces.”) But the
horrid Jews who are always up to trying anything did not spare their usual
sorcery. Those grand Jews wasted their time on magic and jugglery to bind
the fire, but they did not entirely succeed.
12,5 Well, the fire was smouldering and not doing anything but had
practically ceased to be fire.19 When those whose task it was to feed the
fire with fuel—I mean brushwood or scrub—told Josephus what had been
done he rushed from the city, stung to the quick and moved with zeal for
the Lord. (6) He ordered water fetched in a vessel, (I mean a flask, but the
local inhabitants call this a “cacubium,”) < and > took this vessel of water
in the sight of all—a crowd of Jews had gathered to watch, eager to see
how it would turn out and what Josephus would try to do. Tracing the sign
of the cross on the vessel with his own finger, and invoking the name of
Jesus, he cried out, (7) “In the name of Jesus of Nazareth, whom my fathers
and those of all here present crucified, may there be power in this water
to set at naught all sorcery and enchantment these men have wrought, and
to work a miracle on the fire that the Lord’s house may be finished.”
(8) With that he wet his hand and sprinkled the water on each furnace.
And the spells were broken, and in the presence of all, the fire blazed up.
And the crowds of spectators cried, “There is one God, who comes to the
aid of the Christians,” and went away.
12,9 Though they harmed the man on many occasions, he eventually
restored part of the temple at Tiberias and finished a small church. He left
then and came to Scythopolis and made his home. However, he completed
buildings in Diocaesarea and certain other towns. (10) So much for my
account and description of these events, which I recalled here because of
the translation of the books, the rendering from Greek to Hebrew of the
Gospel of John and the Acts of the Apostles.