1,1 Origen,  also  surnamed  Adamantius,2  comes  next  after  these.  He  was the  son  of  the  holy  and  blessed  martyr3  Leonidas,4  and  in  his  youth suffered  a  very  great  deal  of  persecution  himself.5  He  was  well  schooled in  the  Greek  education6  and  brought  up  in  the  church,  and  became known  at  Alexandria  in  the  Emperor  Decius’  time.  (2)  He  was  a  native Egyptian,  but  lived  and  was  brought  up  in  Alexandria,  and  perhaps  also went to the schools at Athens7 at some time.1,3 It is said that he suffered a great deal for the holy word of the faith and  the  name  of  Christ,  and  indeed  was  often  dragged  around  the  city, insulted,  and  subjected  to  excruciating  tortures.8  (4)  Once,  as  the  story goes,  the  pagans  shaved  his  head,  set  him  on  the  steps  of  the  temple  of their  idol  which  they  call  the  Serapeum,  and  ordered  him  to  hand  out palm branches to those who went up the stairs for the vile act of worship-ing  the  idol.  (The  priests  of  their  idols  take  this  posture.)  (5)  Taking  the branches  he  cried  out  without  fear  or  hesitation,  with  loud  voice  and  a bold mind, “Come get Christ’s branch, not the idol’s!” And there are many accounts of his brave deeds which the ancients hand down to us.2,1 But  his  deeds  did  not  remain  worthy  of  the  prize  till  the  end.  He had  been  an  object  of  extreme  envy  for  his  superior  learning  and  educa-tion,  and  this  further  provoked  the  authorities  of  his  day.  (2)  With  dia-bolical malice the workers of iniquity thought of mistreating him sexually and  making  that  his  punishment,  and  they  secured  a  black  to  abuse  his body. (3) But Origen could not bear even the thought of this devil’s work,
and  shouted  that,  given  the  choice  of  either,  he  would  rather  sacrifice.9 (4) Certainly, as is widely reported, he did not do this willingly either. But since  he  had  agreed  do  to  it  at  all,  he  heaped  incense  on  his  hands  and dumped it on the altar fire. (5) Thus he was excluded from a martyr’s sta-tus  at  that  time  by  the  confessors  and  martyrs  who  were  his  judges,  and expelled from the church.102,6 Since he had consented to this at Alexandria and could not bear the ridicule of those who reproached him, he left and elected to live in Pales-tine,  that  is,  in  Judaea.  (7)  On  arriving  at  Jerusalem  he  was  urged  by  the priesthood,  as  a  man  with  such  skill  in  exegesis  and  so  highly  educated, to  speak  in  church.11  (They  say  that  the  presbyterate  had  been  conferred upon  him  earlier,  before  his  sacrifice.)12  (8)  And  so,  as  I  said,  since  those who  were  then  serving  as  priests  in  the  holy  church  in  Jerusalem  urged him  to  speak  in  church  and  strongly  insisted  on  it,  he  stood  up  and  sim-ply recited the verse of the forty-ninth Psalm, omitting all the intervening verses,  “But  unto  the  ungodly  saith  God,  Why  dost  thou  preach  my  laws and  takest  my  covenant  in  thy  mouth?”13  And  he  rolled  the  scroll  up, gave it back, and sat down in floods of tears, and all wept with him.3,1 A  while  later,  at  the  urgent  request  of  many,  he  made  the  acquain-tance of Ambrose, a prominent imperial official. (Some say that Ambrose was  a  Marcionite,  but  some,  that  he  was  a  Sabellian.)14  At  any  rate,  Ori-gen  taught  him  to  shun  and  abjure  the  sect  and  adopt  the  faith  of  God’s holy  church,  for  at  that  time  Origen  was  of  the  orthodox,  catholic  faith. (2)  Since  Ambrose  was  from  a  different  sect  and,  < being >  an  educated man,  was  a  zealous  reader  of  the  sacred  scriptures,  he  asked  Origen  to explain  them  to  him  because  of  the  profundity  of  the  ideas  in  the  sacred books. (3) In compliance and at his urging, Origen was willing to become the  interpreter  of  all  the  scriptures,  as  it  were,  and15  made  it  his  business to  expound  them.  It  is  said  that  < he  spent* >  twenty-eight  years  in  Tyre
in Phoenicia16 (4) < devoting himself * > to a life of extreme piety,17 and to study and hard work. Ambrose provided support for him and his stenogra-phers  and  assistants,18  and  papyrus  and  his  other  expenses;19  and  Origen carried his work on the scripture through by burning the midnight oil, and with the most intense study.3,5 First, making a painstaking effort to collect the < books* > of the six [Old  Testament]  versions—Aquila,  Symmachus,  the  Septuagint,  Theodo-tion,  (6)  and  a  fifth  and  a  sixth  [version]—< he  issued  them* >  setting each Hebrew expression next to them, and the actual < Hebrew > letters as well. But directly opposite these, in a second column next to the Hebrew, he  made  still  another  parallel  text,  but  in  Greek  letters.  (7)  Thus  this  is, and is called a Hexapla,20 and besides the Greek translations < there are > two parallel texts, of the Hebrew actually in < Hebrew > letters, and of the Hebrew in Greek letters. It is thus the whole Old Testament in the version called the Hexapla, and in the two Hebrew texts.3,8 Origen  had  laboriously  accomplished  this  entire  work  but  he  did not  preserve  his  fame  untarnished  till  the  end,  for  his  wealth  of  learning proved to be his great downfall. (9) Precisely because of his goal of leaving none  of  the  sacred  scriptures  uninterpreted  he,  as  an  allurement  to  sin, disguised  himself  and  issued  mortally  dangerous  exegeses.  (10)  The  so-called Origenists < took their cue*> from this. Not the first kind, the < ones who  practice* >  the  obscenity.  As  I  have  already  remarked,  I  cannot  say whether they originate with this Origen who is also called Adamantius, or whether they have another founder whose name was < also > Origen.3,11 It  is  said,  however,  that  our  Origen  too  contrived  < a >  measure affecting  his  body.  < For >  some  say  that  he  severed  a  nerve  so  that  he would  not  be  disturbed  by  sexual  pleasure  or  inflamed  and  aroused  by carnal  impulses.21  (12)  Others  say  no,  but  that  he  invented  a  drug  to apply to his genitals and dry them up. But others venture to ascribe other inventions to him—that he discovered a medicinal plant to assist memory.
(13)  And  though  I  have  no  faith  in  the  exaggerated  stories  about  him, I have not neglected to report what is being said.4,1 The  sect  which  sprang  from  him  was  located  in  Egypt  first,  but  < it is >  now  < to  be  found >  among  the  very  persons  who  are  the  most  emi-nent  and  appear  to  have  adopted  the  monastic  life,  among  those  who have  really  retired  to  the  deserts  and  elected  voluntary  poverty.  But  this is  a  dreadful  sect  and  worse  than  all  the  ancient  ones,  and  indeed,  holds beliefs  similar  to  theirs.  (2)  For  though  it  does  not  train  its  disciples  to perform  the  obscenity,  it  casts  an  evil  suspicion,22  one  worse  than  the obscenity,  upon  the  Godhead  itself.  For  Arius  took  his  cue  from  Origen, and so did the Anomoeans who succeeded him, and the rest.4,3 For  Origen  claims,  and  at  once23  dares,  if  you  please,  to  say  first that  the  Only-begotten  Son  cannot  see  the  Father,  and  neither  can  the Spirit  behold  the  Son;24  and  angels  surely  cannot  behold  the  Spirit,  nor men  the  angels.  (4)  And  this  is  his  first  downfall.  For  he  does  not  believe that  the  Son  is  of  the  Father’s  essence,  but  represents  him  as  entirely  dif-ferent from the Father, and created besides. But he holds that he is called “Son” by grace.4,5 But  he  has  other  downfalls  too,  which  are  more  serious.  He  says that the human soul is preexistent, and that souls are angels and celestial powers,  but  have  sinned  and  so  been  shut  up  in  this  body  as  a  punish-ment.  (6)  They  are  sent  < down >  by  God  as  a  punishment,  to  undergo a  first  judgment  here.  And  so  the  body  is  called  a  “frame”  (δέμα),  says Origen, because the soul has been “bound” (δέδεσθαι) in the body, imagin-ing  the  ancient  Greek  fabrication.  And  he  spins  other  yarns  about  this  as well.  He  says  that  we  speak  of  a  “soul”  (ψυχή)  because  it  has  “cooled  off ” (ψυχθῆναι) in coming down.254,7 He   smears   on   texts   from   the   sacred   scriptures   that   suit   him, though not as they are or with their real interpretation. He claims that the words of the prophet, “Before I was humbled, I offended,”26 are the words of the soul itself, because it “offended” in heaven before it was “humbled”
in the body. (8) And “Return unto thy rest, O my soul,”27 are the words of one who has been valiant in good works here, returning to his rest on high because of the righteousness of his behavior.4,9 And there is much else of the sort to be said. He says that Adam lost the  image  of  God.  And  this  is  why  the  skin  tunics  are  signalized  in  scrip-ture,  for  “He  made  them  tunics  of  skin  and  clothed  them”28  refers  to  the body. And he talks a great deal of nonsense which is widely repeated.4,10 He makes the resurrection of the dead a defective thing, sometimes nominally  supporting  it,  sometimes  denying  it  altogether,  but  at  other times  < saying >  that  there  is  a  partial  resurrection.  (11)  Finally,  he  gives an  allegorical  interpretation  of  whatever  he  can—Paradise,  its  waters, the  waters  above  the  heavens,  the  water  under  the  earth.  He  never  stops saying  these  ridiculous  things  and  others  like  them.  But  I  have  already mentioned things of this sort about him, and discussed them at length, in some of my other works.