1,1 Origen,  also  surnamed  Adamantius,2  comes  next  after  these.  He  was the  son  of  the  holy  and  blessed  martyr3  Leonidas,4  and  in  his  youth suffered  a  very  great  deal  of  persecution  himself.5  He  was  well  schooled in  the  Greek  education6  and  brought  up  in  the  church,  and  became known  at  Alexandria  in  the  Emperor  Decius’  time.  (2)  He  was  a  native Egyptian,  but  lived  and  was  brought  up  in  Alexandria,  and  perhaps  also went to the schools at Athens7 at some time.1,3 It is said that he suffered a great deal for the holy word of the faith and  the  name  of  Christ,  and  indeed  was  often  dragged  around  the  city, insulted,  and  subjected  to  excruciating  tortures.8  (4)  Once,  as  the  story goes,  the  pagans  shaved  his  head,  set  him  on  the  steps  of  the  temple  of their  idol  which  they  call  the  Serapeum,  and  ordered  him  to  hand  out palm branches to those who went up the stairs for the vile act of worship-ing  the  idol.  (The  priests  of  their  idols  take  this  posture.)  (5)  Taking  the branches  he  cried  out  without  fear  or  hesitation,  with  loud  voice  and  a bold mind, “Come get Christ’s branch, not the idol’s!” And there are many accounts of his brave deeds which the ancients hand down to us.2,1 But  his  deeds  did  not  remain  worthy  of  the  prize  till  the  end.  He had  been  an  object  of  extreme  envy  for  his  superior  learning  and  educa-tion,  and  this  further  provoked  the  authorities  of  his  day.  (2)  With  dia-bolical malice the workers of iniquity thought of mistreating him sexually and  making  that  his  punishment,  and  they  secured  a  black  to  abuse  his body. (3) But Origen could not bear even the thought of this devil’s work,
and  shouted  that,  given  the  choice  of  either,  he  would  rather  sacrifice.9 (4) Certainly, as is widely reported, he did not do this willingly either. But since  he  had  agreed  do  to  it  at  all,  he  heaped  incense  on  his  hands  and dumped it on the altar fire. (5) Thus he was excluded from a martyr’s sta-tus  at  that  time  by  the  confessors  and  martyrs  who  were  his  judges,  and expelled from the church.102,6 Since he had consented to this at Alexandria and could not bear the ridicule of those who reproached him, he left and elected to live in Pales-tine,  that  is,  in  Judaea.  (7)  On  arriving  at  Jerusalem  he  was  urged  by  the priesthood,  as  a  man  with  such  skill  in  exegesis  and  so  highly  educated, to  speak  in  church.11  (They  say  that  the  presbyterate  had  been  conferred upon  him  earlier,  before  his  sacrifice.)12  (8)  And  so,  as  I  said,  since  those who  were  then  serving  as  priests  in  the  holy  church  in  Jerusalem  urged him  to  speak  in  church  and  strongly  insisted  on  it,  he  stood  up  and  sim-ply recited the verse of the forty-ninth Psalm, omitting all the intervening verses,  “But  unto  the  ungodly  saith  God,  Why  dost  thou  preach  my  laws and  takest  my  covenant  in  thy  mouth?”13  And  he  rolled  the  scroll  up, gave it back, and sat down in floods of tears, and all wept with him.3,1 A  while  later,  at  the  urgent  request  of  many,  he  made  the  acquain-tance of Ambrose, a prominent imperial official. (Some say that Ambrose was  a  Marcionite,  but  some,  that  he  was  a  Sabellian.)14  At  any  rate,  Ori-gen  taught  him  to  shun  and  abjure  the  sect  and  adopt  the  faith  of  God’s holy  church,  for  at  that  time  Origen  was  of  the  orthodox,  catholic  faith. (2)  Since  Ambrose  was  from  a  different  sect  and,  < being >  an  educated man,  was  a  zealous  reader  of  the  sacred  scriptures,  he  asked  Origen  to explain  them  to  him  because  of  the  profundity  of  the  ideas  in  the  sacred books. (3) In compliance and at his urging, Origen was willing to become the  interpreter  of  all  the  scriptures,  as  it  were,  and15  made  it  his  business to  expound  them.  It  is  said  that  < he  spent* >  twenty-eight  years  in  Tyre
in Phoenicia16 (4) < devoting himself * > to a life of extreme piety,17 and to study and hard work. Ambrose provided support for him and his stenogra-phers  and  assistants,18  and  papyrus  and  his  other  expenses;19  and  Origen carried his work on the scripture through by burning the midnight oil, and with the most intense study.3,5 First, making a painstaking effort to collect the < books* > of the six [Old  Testament]  versions—Aquila,  Symmachus,  the  Septuagint,  Theodo-tion,  (6)  and  a  fifth  and  a  sixth  [version]—< he  issued  them* >  setting each Hebrew expression next to them, and the actual < Hebrew > letters as well. But directly opposite these, in a second column next to the Hebrew, he  made  still  another  parallel  text,  but  in  Greek  letters.  (7)  Thus  this  is, and is called a Hexapla,20 and besides the Greek translations < there are > two parallel texts, of the Hebrew actually in < Hebrew > letters, and of the Hebrew in Greek letters. It is thus the whole Old Testament in the version called the Hexapla, and in the two Hebrew texts.3,8 Origen  had  laboriously  accomplished  this  entire  work  but  he  did not  preserve  his  fame  untarnished  till  the  end,  for  his  wealth  of  learning proved to be his great downfall. (9) Precisely because of his goal of leaving none  of  the  sacred  scriptures  uninterpreted  he,  as  an  allurement  to  sin, disguised  himself  and  issued  mortally  dangerous  exegeses.  (10)  The  so-called Origenists < took their cue*> from this. Not the first kind, the < ones who  practice* >  the  obscenity.  As  I  have  already  remarked,  I  cannot  say whether they originate with this Origen who is also called Adamantius, or whether they have another founder whose name was < also > Origen.3,11 It  is  said,  however,  that  our  Origen  too  contrived  < a >  measure affecting  his  body.  < For >  some  say  that  he  severed  a  nerve  so  that  he would  not  be  disturbed  by  sexual  pleasure  or  inflamed  and  aroused  by carnal  impulses.21  (12)  Others  say  no,  but  that  he  invented  a  drug  to apply to his genitals and dry them up. But others venture to ascribe other inventions to him—that he discovered a medicinal plant to assist memory.
(13)  And  though  I  have  no  faith  in  the  exaggerated  stories  about  him, I have not neglected to report what is being said.4,1 The  sect  which  sprang  from  him  was  located  in  Egypt  first,  but  < it is >  now  < to  be  found >  among  the  very  persons  who  are  the  most  emi-nent  and  appear  to  have  adopted  the  monastic  life,  among  those  who have  really  retired  to  the  deserts  and  elected  voluntary  poverty.  But  this is  a  dreadful  sect  and  worse  than  all  the  ancient  ones,  and  indeed,  holds beliefs  similar  to  theirs.  (2)  For  though  it  does  not  train  its  disciples  to perform  the  obscenity,  it  casts  an  evil  suspicion,22  one  worse  than  the obscenity,  upon  the  Godhead  itself.  For  Arius  took  his  cue  from  Origen, and so did the Anomoeans who succeeded him, and the rest.4,3 For  Origen  claims,  and  at  once23  dares,  if  you  please,  to  say  first that  the  Only-begotten  Son  cannot  see  the  Father,  and  neither  can  the Spirit  behold  the  Son;24  and  angels  surely  cannot  behold  the  Spirit,  nor men  the  angels.  (4)  And  this  is  his  first  downfall.  For  he  does  not  believe that  the  Son  is  of  the  Father’s  essence,  but  represents  him  as  entirely  dif-ferent from the Father, and created besides. But he holds that he is called “Son” by grace.4,5 But  he  has  other  downfalls  too,  which  are  more  serious.  He  says that the human soul is preexistent, and that souls are angels and celestial powers,  but  have  sinned  and  so  been  shut  up  in  this  body  as  a  punish-ment.  (6)  They  are  sent  < down >  by  God  as  a  punishment,  to  undergo a  first  judgment  here.  And  so  the  body  is  called  a  “frame”  (δέμα),  says Origen, because the soul has been “bound” (δέδεσθαι) in the body, imagin-ing  the  ancient  Greek  fabrication.  And  he  spins  other  yarns  about  this  as well.  He  says  that  we  speak  of  a  “soul”  (ψυχή)  because  it  has  “cooled  off ” (ψυχθῆναι) in coming down.254,7 He   smears   on   texts   from   the   sacred   scriptures   that   suit   him, though not as they are or with their real interpretation. He claims that the words of the prophet, “Before I was humbled, I offended,”26 are the words of the soul itself, because it “offended” in heaven before it was “humbled”
in the body. (8) And “Return unto thy rest, O my soul,”27 are the words of one who has been valiant in good works here, returning to his rest on high because of the righteousness of his behavior.4,9 And there is much else of the sort to be said. He says that Adam lost the  image  of  God.  And  this  is  why  the  skin  tunics  are  signalized  in  scrip-ture,  for  “He  made  them  tunics  of  skin  and  clothed  them”28  refers  to  the body. And he talks a great deal of nonsense which is widely repeated.4,10 He makes the resurrection of the dead a defective thing, sometimes nominally  supporting  it,  sometimes  denying  it  altogether,  but  at  other times  < saying >  that  there  is  a  partial  resurrection.  (11)  Finally,  he  gives an  allegorical  interpretation  of  whatever  he  can—Paradise,  its  waters, the  waters  above  the  heavens,  the  water  under  the  earth.  He  never  stops saying  these  ridiculous  things  and  others  like  them.  But  I  have  already mentioned things of this sort about him, and discussed them at length, in some of my other works.295,1 But even now, in the Sect that deals with him, it will do no harm to describe them again for the same reason and purpose, and give his refuta-tion from his own counterfeits. (2) For there is a great deal of his nonsense that  came  later,  and  the  cultivation  of  an  idea  that  is  false  and  departs from the truth. (3) For he appeared to speak against every sect before him and  refute  each  one,  but  later  he  spat  this  sect  up  into  the  world,  one  of no little influence.5,4 So  then,  first  I  shall  quote  his  own  words  in  refutation  of  his  false, bogus  notion;  then  I  shall  show  what  I,  in  my  mediocrity,  intend  to  say against  him.  And  here  they  are,  the  things  he  told  the  world  in The  First Psalm;  (5)  for  though  he  is  always  on  slippery  ground  in  every  scripture, in the essential parts he erred in so many words.But since < his writings are* > very bulky—as I mentioned, he is said to have  written  a  long  work  on  every  scripture—< it  is  impossible  to  quote all of it; but Origen never* > refused to say what he thought < in his expo-sitions  of  the  scripture* >.  (6)  And  he  has  a  modest  reputation  for  what he  said  about  ethics,  types  of  animals  and  so  on  in  his  sermons  and  pref-aces,  and  often  gave  clever  expositions.  (7)  But  in  his  position  on  doc-trines,  and  about  faith  and  higher  speculation,  he  is  the  wickedest  of all  before  and  after  him,  except  for  the  shameless  behavior  in  the  sects. 
(8)  (For  as  I  indicated  above,  he  chose  to  adopt  even  an  ascetic  style  of life.  Some  say  that  his  stomach  was  ruined  by  his  excessively  severe  regi-men, and fasting and abstention from meat.5,9 Well  then,  I  shall  quote  his  own  words  from  the First  Psalm30 < along with > his doctrinal speculations in it—word for word, so that no one may call my attack on him vexatious. (10) Not, by any means, that he strayed from the truth only in the First Psalm; as I have often said, he did it  in  every  exposition.  But  because  of  the  bulk  of  his  work  let  me  select some things from his Psalm here, and show the whole of his unsoundness in the faith from one, two or three remarks, of course taking care to speak against them. (11) And here, at once, is the text of every word, to show you, scholarly hearer, that Origen plainly held that the Son of God is a creature, and also show you, from his impudence about the Son, that he taught that the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  creature  of  a  creature.  (12)  Let  us  take  a  part  of  the Psalm, from  the  beginning  until  the  actual  expression  [in  question],  in Origen’s own words.
6,1 God’s oracles tell us that the sacred scriptures have been locked away and sealed with the “key of David”31—also, perhaps, with the seal of which it said, “an  impression  of  a  seal,  hallowed  to  the  Lord.”32  They  are  sealed,  in  other words,  by  the  power  of  the  God  who  gave  them,  the  power  which  is  meant by the seal. (2) In the Book of Revelation John instructs us further about this locking away and sealing and says, “And to the angel of the church in Phila-delphia write, These things saith he that is holy, he that is true, he that hath the  key  of  David,  he  that  openeth,  and  none  shall  shut,  and  shutteth,  and none  shall  open.  I  know  thy  works;  behold,  I  have  set  before  thee  an  open door,  and  no  man  can  shut  it.”33(3) And  a  little  further  on,  “And  I  saw  in the right hand of him that sat on the throne a book written within and on the backside, sealed with seven seals. And I saw another strong angel proclaim-ing  with  a  loud  voice,  Who  is  worthy  to  open  the  book  and  to  loose  the  seals thereof? (4) And  no  man  in  heaven,  nor  on  earth,  neither  under  the  earth, was  able  to  open  the  book,  neither  to  look  thereon.  And  I  wept,  because  no man  was  found  worthy  to  open  the  book,  neither  to  look  thereon. (5) And
one  of  the  elders  saith  unto  me,  Weep  not.  Behold,  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of Judah, the Root of David, hath prevailed to open the book and the seven seals thereof.”34And,  of  the  sealing  alone,  Isaiah  says  the  following:  “And  all  these  words shall  be  unto  you  as  the  words  of  this  book  that  is  sealed.  The  which,  if  it  be given  to  any  man  that  is  learned,  saying  Read  this,  he  shall  say,  I  cannot read  it,  for  it  is  sealed,  And  this  book  shall  be  given  into  the  hands  of  a  man that  is  not  learned,  and  one  shall  say  unto  him,  Read  this.  And  he  shall  say, I  am  not learned.”356,7 We  must  take  it  that  this  is  said  not  only  of  John’s  Revelation  and Isaiah,  but  of  all  of  sacred  scripture—admittedly,  even  by  those  who  are capable  of  a  fair  understanding  of  the  oracles  of  God.  For  scripture  is  filled with  riddles,  parables,  difficult  sayings  and  manifold  other  forms  of  obscu-rity, and is hard for human comprehension. (8) In his desire to teach us this the  Savior  too  said,  “Woe  unto  you  lawyers!”—as  though  scribes  and  Phari-sees  held  the  key  but  made  no  effort  to  find  the  way  to  open  the  door.  “For ye  have  taken  away  the  key  of  knowledge.  Ye  entered  not  in  yourselves,  and them  that were  entering in  ye  suffered not to  enter.”367,1 Ihave said this by way of preface, holy Ambrose, since I am compelled by your great love of learning and my respect for your kindness and humility, to  embark  on  a  struggle  of  the  utmost  difficulty,  and  admittedly  beyond  me and  my  strength. (2) And  since  I  was  hesitant  for  a  long  time,  knowing  the danger  not  only  of  speaking  of  holy  things  but,  far  more,  of  writing  of  them and leaving one’s work for posterity, you will be my witness before God of the disposition  with  which  I  have  done  this—even  though,  with  all  the  world,  I too  inquire  into  these  matters.  For  with  all  sorts  of  friendly  blandishment, and  with  godly  encouragement,  you  have  brought  me  to  it. (3) And  I  some-times  hit  the  mark,  but  sometimes  argue  too  vehemently  or  < otherwise* > appear  to  say  something  < too  daring* >.  I  have,  however,  investigated  the sacred writings without despising the aptly put, “When thou speakest of God, thou  art  judged  of  God,”  and,  “It  is  no  small  risk  to  speak  even  the  truth of  God.”7,4 Now  since  without  God  there  can  be  no  good  thing,  most  of  all  no understanding of the inspired scriptures, I ask you to approach the God and Father  of  all  through  our  Savior  and  High  Priest,  the  originated (γενητός)
origen 141God, and pray that he will grant me, first, to seek rightly. For there is a prom-ise  of  finding  for  those  who  seek;  [but]  it  may  be  that  there  is  no  promise  at all  for  seekers  if  God  deems  them  to  be  proceeding  by  a  road  that  does  not lead  to finding.
8,1 And  first  I  need  to  discuss  the  term,  “originated  God,”  with  this  brag-gart  with  his  illusory  wisdom,  this  searcher  out  of  the  unsearchable  and exhibitor  of  the  heavenly  realms,  who,  as  a  greater  man  than  I  has  said, has  filled  the  world  with  nonsense.  (2)  And  anyone  can  see  that  there are  many  equivalents  and  synonyms.  (3)  If  the  term  were  used  by  some-one  else,  one  might  say  that  this  too  had  been  said  with  right  intent.  But since  I  have  found  in  many  instances  that  Origen  wrongly  distinguishes between the Only-begotten God and the Father’s Godhead and essence—and  the  same  with  the  Holy  Spirit—it  is  plain  that  by  saying  “originated God” he is pronouncing him a creature.8,4 For though some would like to outwit me and say that “originated” is the same thing as “begotten,” < this > is not admissible. < The latter may be said only of God, but the former* > may not be said of God, but only of creatures. “Originated” is one thing, “begotten,” another.8,5 Now as to Origen’s statement that God is created or originated, let me  ask  first,  “How  was  the  person  created  whom,  by  this  expression  of yours, you honor as God? And if he is created, how can he be worshiped?” (6) Set aside the holy apostle’s censure of those who make gods of created things; grant that a creature can be worshiped as God by the principles of the  godly  faith,  which  worships  the  creator,  not  the  creature!  Then  it  will be reasonable for you to derive your erroneous argument from the piety of the fathers. But you can certainly not prove this. (7) And even if you ven-tured  to  steal  it  from  somewhere  and  distort  it—even  so,  you  Godstruck simpleton,  you  cannot  change  the  good  sense  of  the  godly  into  judgment as  poor  as  this!  Both  your  intent  and  your  argument  are  against  you; (8)  as  I  said,  no  created  thing  is  worthy  of  worship.  But  if  it  is  worthy of  worship  at  all,  then,  since  there  are  many  other  created  things,  it  will make  no  difference  to  us  if  we  worship  them  all  along  with  the  one  crea-ture; they are its fellow servants, and in the same category.9,1 But  let  us  see  by  the  four  Gospels  through  which  the  divine  Word, when he came, revealed our whole salvation, whether Christ has ever said, “God created me,” or, “My Father created me!” And let us see whether the Father  declared  in  any  of  the  Gospels,  “I  have  created  the  Son  and  sent
him to you.” (2) But enough of this for now; as to proof-texts, I have often cited them at length against people who introduce the notion of the Son’s creaturehood.9,3 Even here, however, it will do no harm to show the ease with which the  term  can  be  refuted  and  ask  the  would-be  sage,  “Mister,  how  can  he be a creature when he says, “I am in the Father and the Father in me, and we  two  are  one?”37  (4)  How  can  he  be  different  from  the  Father  when he  has  equal  honor?  For  “No  man  knoweth  the  Son  save  the  Father,  nor the  Father,  save  the  Son,”38  and,  “He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the Father?”399,5 And  in  turn,  resuming  the  thread  I  am  likewise  going  to  speak  of all  his  doubts  about  resurrection,  again  from  his  own  words.  And  let  me make the whole of his opinion plain and reveal the infidelity of his doctri-nal  position  from  one  passage.  (6)  < For >  even  though  he  has  often  spo-ken  at  length  of  this  and  talked  nonsense  about  it  in  many  books,  I  shall still  offer  the  refutation  from  the  argument  he  gives  in The  First  Psalm against the sure hope of us who believe in the resurrection.10,1 And  it  is  as  follows.  He  says, Therefore  the  ungodly  shall  not  arise in  the  judgment.40  Next  (in  his  usual  manner  of  parading  the  versions, Likewise  Theodotion,  Aquila  and  Symmachus.  Then  he  scornfully  attacks the sons of the truth:10,2 Thus the simpler believers suppose that the ungodly do not attain the resurrection  and  are  not  held  worthy  of  the  divine  judgment;  but  they  have no way of explaining what they suppose the resurrection is, and what sort of judgment  they  imagine. (3) For  even  if  they  think  they  are  expressing  their opinion of these matters, examination will show that they cannot defend the consequences  of  their  beliefs,  having  no  grasp  of  the  nature  of  resurrection and  judgment.10,4 Thus  if  we  ask  them  what  it  is  a  resurrection  of,  they  reply,  “Of  the bodies  we  have  now.”  If  we  then  ask  further  whether  or  not  there  is  a  res-urrection  of  our  whole  being  before  we  examine  them  they  say,  “Of  our whole  being.’ ” (5) But  if,  allowing  for  the  naivete  of  those  who  do  not  even < understand* >  the  mutability  of  nature,  we  raise  further  questions  and inquire  whether  all  the  blood  that  has  been  lost  in  bleedings  will  rise  with our  bodies—and  all  the  flesh  that  has  wasted  away  in  illness,  and  all  the
hair we have ever had, or only the hair we had at the last, towards our end— (6) they  are  distressed  and  sometimes  take  offense  at  the  questioning  since they  believe  we  must  allow  God  to  deal  with  these  things  as  he  wills.  But sometimes,  since  they  believe  that  our  hair  at  the  end  of  this  life  goes  down to the grave with the body, they say that it will arise with it. (7) The better of them, however, to avoid having to take account of the blood which has flowed from our bodies on many occasions, and the flesh which changes < to > sweat or  something  else in  illness,  say that  it  is our  body  at the  end  that rises.11,1 These are the would-be sage’s trifling objections to the truth; I have been  obliged  to  quote  them  as  proof  for  those  who  wish  to  know  the  full sense  of  his  disbelief  in  the  resurrection.  Indeed,  he  makes  many  other < silly remarks* > in the course of the Psalm, one after another. (2) For he says, Therefore the ungodly shall not arise in the judgment.41From here on he  attacks  those  who  declare  the  certainty  of  the  resurrection,  and  who believe in the sure hope of the resurrection of the dead, for their naivete. And  by  adducing  many  weak  points,  inculcating  a  sophistical  opinion, (3) < and presenting > no reliable argument but any old thing drawn from logic  for  the  ruin  of  his  followers,  he  tried  to  overthrow  the  confession of  our  true  hope  in  the  resurrection  by  referring  to  the  accidents  of  our nature.11,4 But  given  my  limited  ability,  I  wouldn’t  dare  hope  to  improve  on those  who  have  done  good  work  already  and  replied  with  full  justice  to all  the  rhetorical  villainy  Origen  has  thought  of.  I  believe  I  may  rest  con-tent with the blessed Methodius’ remarks against Origen with reference to the  matter  of  the  resurrection.  I  shall  present  these  here,  word  for  word; Methodius’ words as he composed them are as follows:
12,1 Thus  the  simpler  believers  suppose  that  the  ungodly  do  not  attain  the resurrection < and are not held worthy of the divine judgment; but they have no  way  of  explaining > what  they  think  resurrection  is,  < or  what  sort  of judgment they imagine >. (2) For even if they think they are expressing their opinion of these matters, examination will show that they cannot defend the consequences  of  their  beliefs  < and  have  no  grasp  of  the  mode  of  the  resur-rection and  judgment >.
12,3 Thus  if  we  ask  them  what  it  is  a  resurrection  of,  they  reply,  “of  the bodies  we  have  now.”  If  we  then  ask  further  whether  or  not  there  is  a  resur-rection  of  our  whole  being  before  we  examine  them  they  say,  “of  our  whole being.” (4) But  if,  allowing  for  the  naivete  < of  those  who  do  not  even  under-stand  the  mutability  of  nature >,  we  raise  further  questions  < and  inquire > whether  all  the  blood  that  has  been  lost  in  bleedings  will  rise  with  our bodies—and  all  the  flesh  and  hair  we  have  ever  had,  or  just  what  we  had toward  our  end—(5) they  will  be  distressed  and  take  refuge  in  the  answer that God < may > do as he will. The better of them, however, will say that it is our body at the end that rises, and thus not have to take account of the same blood which flows from our bodies on many occasions, < and the flesh which changes to  sweat  or something  else in  illness >.12,6 But  because  of  the  natural  mutability  of  bodies  and  points  of  this sort,  we  have  raised  further  questions.  As  foods  are  taken  into  the  body  and change their appearances, (7) so our bodies too are changed in birds of prey and  wild  beasts,  and  become  parts  of  those  bodies.  And  when  they  in  turn are  eaten  by  men  or  other  animals,  they  are  changed  correspondingly  and become the bodies of men and other animals. (8) And as this continues for a long time, the same body must often become a part of several men. In the res-urrection,  then,  whose  body  will  it  be?  And  as  a  result  we  become  immersed in  senseless  drivel.13,1 And  after  these  objections  they  resort  to  the  reply  that  all  things  are possible  with  God,  and  cite  texts  from  the  scriptures  which,  if  takenat  their face value, are capable of supporting their opinion. (2) For example, Ezekiel’s “And the hand of the Lord was upon me, and he brought me forth in the spirit and  set  me  in  the  midst  of  the  plain,  and  it  was  full  of  men’s  bones.  And  he brought me about themround about, and lo, there were very many upon the face of the plain, and lo, they were very dry. (3) And he said unto me, Son of man,  can  these  bones  live?  And  I  said,  Lord  God,  thou  knowest  these  things. (4) And  he  said  unto  me,  Prophesy,  son  of  man.  And  thou  shalt  say  unto them,  Ye  dry  bones,  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord.  Thus  saith  Adonai,  the  Lord, unto  these  bones:  Lo,  I  will  bring  into  you  the  breath  of  life,  and  I  will  put sinews  upon  you  and  cover  you  with  flesh,  and  I  will  stretch  skin  upon  you and  put  my  Spirit  within  you,  and  ye  shall  live.  And  I  will  place  you  in  your own  land,  and  ye  shall know  that  I  am  the Lord.”4213,5 They  use  this  passage  < as >  something  quite  convincing.  But  theyalso <gather > sayings from the Gospels, such as, “There shall be wailing and
gnashing  of  teeth,”43 and,  “Fear  him  that  is  able  to  destroy  both  soul  and body in hell,”44 and Paul’s, “He shall raise up your mortal bodies through his Spirit  that dwelleth in  you.”4514,1 But every lover of truth, who is just as determined as they to contend for  the  resurrection,  must  both  preserve  the  tradition  of  the  ancients  and guard  against  falling  into  the  tomfoolery  of  contemptible  notions  which  are both impossible and unworthy of God. (2) And at this point it must be stated that  by  nature  no  body  ever  has  the  same  material  substratum,  since  some-thing such as food is put into it from without, and as this food is eliminated, further  things  such  as  vegetable  and  animal  products  are  put  in  place  of the  further  materials  which  have  been  put  into  it. (3) Thus  the  body  has  not inaptly  been  called  a  river.  For  strictly  speaking,  the  first  substratum  in  our bodies  is  scarcely  the  same  for  two  days,  even  though,  despite  the  fluidity  of the nature of a body, Paul’s body, say, or Peter’s, is always the same. (Same-ness does not apply only to the soul, the nature of which is neither in flux like our  [body’s],  nor  ever  susceptible  of  addition.) (4) This  is  because  the  form which identifies the body is the same, just as the features which characterize Peter’s  or  Paul’s  bodies  remain  the  same—characteristics  < like >  childhood scars,  and  such  peculiarities < as > moles,  and any  others  besides.14,5 This  form,  the  bodily,  which  constitutes  Peter  and  Paul,  encloses  the soul  once  more  at  the  resurrection,  changed  for  the  better—but  surely  not this extension which underlay it at the first. (6) For as the form is < the same > from  infancy  until  old  age  even  though  the  features  appearto  undergo  con-siderable  change,  so  we  must  suppose  that,  though  its  change  for  the  better will  be very  great, our  present  form  will  be the  same  in the  world  to  come.14,7 For  a  soul  which  is  in  bodily  places  must  have  bodies  befitting  the places. (8) And just as, if we had to become water creatures and lived in the sea, we would surely need gills and the other features of fish, so, as we are to inherit  the  kingdom  of  heaven  and  live  in  places  superior  to  ours,  we  must have  spiritual  bodies. (9) But  despite  its  change  to  greater  glory  the  form  of the previous body does not vanish, just as, at the transfiguration, the forms of Jesus, Moses  and  Elijah were not  different from  what they  had  been.15,1 Therefore  do  not  be  offended  if  someone  should  say  that  the  first substratum  will  not  be  the  same  then.  For  to  those  who  can  understand  the matter,  reason  shows  that,  even  now,  the  first  substratum  is  not  the  same
two days running. (2) It also should be realized that one thing is sown, but a different thing comes up; for “It is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body.”46  (3) And  Paul,  practically  teaching  us  that  we  will  discard  < every > earthly  characteristic  at  the  resurrection  while  our  form  will  be  preserved, adds,  “This  I  say,  brethren,  that  flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom of  God;  neither  doth  corruption  inherit  incorruption.”47  (4) This  will  natu-rally  be  maintained  in  the  case  of  the  holy < body >  by  Him  who  gave  form to  the  flesh—which  is  flesh  no  longer,  but  whatever  was  once  characteristic of  the flesh  will be  characteristic  of  the  spiritual body.15,5 And  < as  to>  the  sayings  of  the  scriptures  which  our  brethren  cite, there is this to be said. First, Ezekiel’s, since the simpler sort prefer to < rely > on it. According to these lines there will be no resurrection of flesh, but only of bones, skin and sinews. (6) At the same time they must be shown that they are too hasty, since they have not understood the passage. Simply because bones are mentioned we need not take them to mean the bones we have—just as it is obvious that, in “Our bones were scattered beside Hades,”48 “All my bones were  scattered,”49 and,  “Heal  me,  for  my  bones  were  troubled,”50 it  is  plain that “bones”  in  the common  acceptation of  the word  are  not intended.15,7 Now to this tally Ezekiel adds, “They say, Our bones are dried up. Are they  therefore  saying,  “Our  bones  are  dried  up,”51  with  the  intent  that  the bones be reassembled and rise? But this cannot be. (8) They could be saying, “Our  bones  are  dried  up,” however,  because  they  are  in  captivity  and  have lost  all  their  living  moisture.  And  so  they  add,  “Our  hope  is  perished,  we  are lost.”52 Thus  the  promise  of  the  people’s  resurrection  is  a  promise  of  their rising from their fall, and from the death which, in a way, they have died for their  sins  by  being  abandoned  to  their  enemies. (9) Sinners  too  are  called “sepulchers  full  of  dead  men’s  bones  and  all  uncleanness”53  by  the  Savior. And it is fitting that God open each of our graves of, and bring us forth from the  graves  quickened, as  the  Savior brought Lazarus  forth.16,1 But  as  to  “There  shall  be  wailing  and  gnashing  of  teeth,”54 we  must confront  them  with  the  objection  that,  as  in  this  life  the  creator  has  made
every member of the body for some purpose, so he has made the teeth to chew solid  food.  Why  do  the  damned  need  teeth,  then?  Our  brethren  do  not  claim that  they  eat  in  hell. (2) And  it  must  be  pointed  out  that  not  everything  in scripture  is  to  be  taken  literally.  Scripture  says,  “Thou  hast  broken  the  teeth of  sinners,”55 and,  “The  Lord  hath  crushed  the  teeth  of  the  lions,”56 but  who is  so  foolish  as  to  suppose  that,  while  preserving  sinners’  bodies,  God  breaks only  their  teeth? (3) Just  as  whoever  wanted  the  lines  to  read  like  that  was obliged by his discomfort with them to resort to allegory, so one must look for the  gnashing  of  the  teeth  of  the  damned.  The  soul  has  the  faculty  of  “chew-ing  [on  things],”  and  when  convicted  of  its  sins  will  “gnash  its  teeth”  by  the clashing of  its  thoughts.57
16,6 But  “Fear  him  which  is  able  to  destroy  both  soul  and  body  in  hell”58 perhaps  teaches  that  the  soul  is  incorporeal,  or  even,  perhaps,  means  that the  soul  will  not  be  punished  apart  from  the  body.  I  have  already  spoken from  the  naturalist’s  perspective  of  the  form  and  the  first  substratum  of  the body. 16,7 And the apostle’s saying, “He shall also quicken your mortal bodies,”59even when the body is mortal and incapable of true life, can be a proof that, although the bodily form of which we have spoken is by nature mortal, it will itself  be  changed  from  a  “body  of  death,”60  be  quickened  by  the  life-giving Spirit  “when  Christ  who  is  our  life  shall  appear,”61 and  from  < fleshly > become  spiritual. (8) And  “Some  man  will  say,  How  are  the  dead  raised up,  and  with  what  body  do  they  come?”62  is  also  plain  proof  that  the  first substratum  will  not  be  raised. (9) For  if  we  have  understoodthe  illustra-tion  properly,  we  must  hold  that  when  the  generative  principle  in  the  grain of  wheat  has  laid  hold  of  the  matter  which  surrounds  it,  has  permeated  it entirely  < and > has  taken  control  of  its  form,  it  imparts  its  own  powers  to what  was  formerly  earth,  water,  air  and  fire,  and  by  prevailing  over  their characteristics transforms them into the thing of which it is the creator. And thus  the  ear  of  grain  comes  to  maturity,  vastly  different  from  the  original seed  in size,  shape and  complexity.
17,1 So  much  by  way  of  summary  of  the  points  which  Origen  endeavored  to make  in  his  treatise  on  resurrection,  in  proof  of  a  very  complex  hypothesis. But consider too the points which follow from these. (2) It remains to take up the  additional  texts  from  scripture  so  that,  like  an  image  < with >  all  parts of it in proportion, this presentation may < thereby > gain < symmetry > and be fully framed as a whole, lacking nothing that contributes to its shape and beauty. (3) We  must  therefore  explain  why  the  scriptures  which  enable  one to  perfect  a  better  proof  agree  with  the  above.  For  if  one  is  capable  of  a  pre-cise  understanding  of  this  and  falls  short  in  nothing  that  is  needed,  he  will realize  that  the  resurrection  may  not  be  taken  to  apply  to  this  body  which cannot  remain  unchanged  forever,  but  that  it  must  apply  to  the  spiritual body,  in  which  the  very  same  form  that  is  even  now  preserved  in  this  body will be retained—so that, as has also been said by Origen, each of us will be the  same  even  in  appearance.17,4 For  he  proposed  that  the  resurrection  will  be  as  follows:  Since  the material  body  is  mutable,  he  says,  and  since  it  never  remains  even  briefly the  same  but  is  increased  and  diminished  in  the  form  characteristic  of  the man,  by  which  his  appearance  is  preserved,  we  must  of  necessity  expect  the resurrection  to  be  reserved  for  the  form  alone. (5) And  lest  you  say,  “I  don’t understand”—Origen’s  treatment  of  this  was  difficult—I  shall  explain  the sense  of  this  more  clearly  to  you  here. (6) You  have  surely  seen  an  animal skin,  or  something  else  of  the  sort,  filled  with  water  in  such  a  way  that,  if  it is  emptied  of  a  little  of  its  water  and  then  filled  with  a  little,  it  always  shows the  same  shape;  for  the  container’s  contents  must  conform  to  the  shape  of the container. (7) Well then, suppose the water is leaking out. If one adds an amount of water equal to that which is spilled and does not allow the skin to be  entirely  emptied  of  water,  unless  that  occurs  the  added  water  must  look like  the  water  which  was  there  before,  since  the  container  of  the  inflowing and  the outflowing water  is the  same.17,8 Now  if  one  chooses  to  compare  the  body  to  this,  he  will  not  be  put  to shame. For what is brought in by the food in place of the flesh which hasbeen eliminated  will  likewise  be  changed  to  the  shape  of  the  form  which  contains it.  And  the  part  of  it  that  is  dispersed  to  the  eyes  looks  like  the  eyes,  the  part that is dispersed to the face looks like the face, and the part that is dispersed to the other members looks like them. Thus everyone looks the same, though
the  flesh  in  them  is  not  their  original  flesh,  but  the  flesh  of  the  form  whose shape  the  incoming was  given.17,9 Now  if  we  are  not  the  same  in  body  even  for  a  few  days  but  are  the same  in  the  form  of  the  body—only  this  is  stable  from  its  creation—all the  more,  neither  will  we  be  the  same  in  the  flesh  then,  but  we  shall  be  the same  in  the  form  which  now  <and>  always  is  preserved  and  remains  in  us. (10) For  as,  although  the  body  is  not  the  same  now,  its  appearance  is  kept the  same  because  it  has  the  same  form,  so,  though  the  body  will  not  be  the same then either, the form will be manifest, grown more glorious—no longer in  a  perishable,  but  in  an  impassible  and  spiritual  body  as  Jesus’  was  at  the transfiguration when he ascended the mountain with Peter, and as were the bodies of  Moses  and Elijah  who  appeared  to him.18,1 So much for this; this, in sum, is the sense of Origen’s doctrines. (2) But suppose  that  one  who  doubts  this  urges  the  body  of  Christ—for  he  is  called “the  firstborn  from  the  dead”64 and  the  “firstfruits  of  them  that  slept”65—and  says  that  we  must  expect  the  resurrection  of  everyone’s  <bodies>  to  be like  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  so  that  “God  will  bring  them  which  sleep  in Jesus with him”66 in the same way that Christ was raised. But, [he will go on to say], Jesus’ < body > has risen even with the flesh it had, and with its bones, as Thomas was convinced. We [ for our part] shall say, (3) “But Christ’s body was  not  ‘by  the  will  of  a  man,’ 67 ‘of  pleasure  accompanying  sleep,’ 68  ‘con-ceived  in  iniquities  and  begotten  in  sins.’69 It  was  ‘of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the power  of  the  Highest  and  the  Virgin,’ ”70  while  yours  is  the  product  of  sleep, pleasure  and  dirt. (4) And  thus  the  sage,  Sirach,  said,  “When  a  man  dieth  it is said, He shall inherit creeping things, snakes and worms.”71 And < David > in the eighty-seventh Psalm said, “Wilt thou do wonders for the dead, or shall physicians rise up and confess thee? Will thy mercy be told in the grave and thy  faithfulness  in  destruction?  Will  thy  wondrous  works  be  known  in  the dark,  and  thy  righteousness  in  the  forgotten  land?”72(5) And  for  one  who cares  to  gather  them  from  thescriptures,  there  are  other  passages  of  the
same  kind.  < Let  us  omit  them* >,  lest,  by  mentioning  them  all,  I  make  my discourse many  times longer  than  what has  been said.
19,1 Proclus,  then,  came  to  a  reluctant  halt  and  the  hearers  were  silent  for some  time,  for  they  had  been  pretty  well  cast  down  into  unbelief.  And  I  saw that he had really finished, raised my head unnoticed by the rest, and heaved a  sigh  like  sailors  when  the  swell  subsides,  though  I  was  still  trembling slightly,  and  giddy—(I  had  been  hit,  I  can  tell  you,  and  was  overwhelmed by  the  frightfulness  of  the  words.) (2) Iturned  to  Auxentius  and  addressed him  by  name.  “Auxentius,”  I  said,  “I  believe  that  the  line,  ‘Two  proceeding together,’ 73 was not spoken in vain, since we have two opponents. Therefore ‘Let  the  both  of  us  become  as  strong  as  the  both  of  them.’ 74(3) Ichoose  you for  my  ally  and  fellow  combatant  in  the  battle  against  them  to  keep  Aglao-phon,  in  alliance  with  Proclus  and  armed  against  us  with  Origen’s  objec-tions, from sacking the resurrection. (4) Come then, let us stand our ground against their sophisms, fearing none of the counter-arguments by which the cowardly are struck. For there is no soundness or firmness whatever in them, but  merely  a  specious  show  of  words  rehearsed  for  the  purpose  of  aweing and  swaying  the  hearers,  not  for  the  sake  of  the  truth  and  for  the  hear-ers’  benefit,  but  so  that  the  words  will  sound  wise  to  the  audience. (5) Thus probable  propositions,  embellished  for  the  sake  of  beauty  and  to  give  plea-sure,  are  sometimes  thought  better  by  the  masses  than  the  results  of  precise investigation—though  the  teachers  are  not  striving  for  improvement  and still  more,  for  holiness,  but  to  please  and  succeed,  like  the  sophists  who  take money for  what  they say,  and  cut the  price  of their  wisdom for  applause.19,6 “Anciently, expositions were always brief, and were given by persons who were at pains, not to please, but to benefit the audiences of their day. But latterly, ever since, from carelessness, anyone has been permitted to interpret the  scriptures,  they  have  all  been  filled  with  conceit  and  lost  their  keenness for  doing  good,  but  have  prided  themselves  on  their  progress  in  debating  as though they were clever enough to know everything—ashamed to admit that they  needed  teaching  but < ambitious* >  to  contend,  like  their  teachers,  and to seek to surpass . . .75(7) Thus from over-confidence they have lapsed from
piety, meekness, and the belief that God can do all thathe has promised, and have  come  to  meaningless,  blasphemous  disputations,  unaware  that  deeds were  not  performed  for  the  sake  of  words,  but  words  [were  spoken]  for  the sake  of  deeds—as  < in >  medicine,  whereby  the  sick  must  be  cured  by  the putting  of  set  words  into  application—so  that,  once  we  have  been  tuned, our  minds  may  be  in  full  accord  with  our  best  words,  and,  like  lyres,  pro-vide behavior in tune with our speech, but not discordant and inharmonious. (8) To  attain  to  righteousness  we  must  truly  struggle  to  practice  it—not struggle  in  appearance,  setting  foot  on  the  path  of  wisdom  with  a  limp,  and in  place  of  a  real  effort  making  an  apparent  one,  disguised  with  pretexts, pretenses, and  all  the trappings  of hypocrisy.20,1 For  there  are  indeed  persons  who,  like  women  artfully  made  up for  deception,  < beguile  the  simple* >  with  the  embraces  of  words  show-ily  adorned,  unless  someone  examines  them  with  a  concern  for  those  even younger  in  the  faith,  and  in  a  sober  manner. (2) One  must  take  care,  then, before he learns to accept this sort of talk with trust. For deceivers often over-take  the  wavering,  just  as  the  Sirens  overtake  those  who  flee  from  them  by disguising  their  hatred  of  humanity  with  beautiful  singing  from  afar. (3) Or what do  you  < think >  of this  situation, Auxentius?” I  said.“The  same  as  you,” he  replied.20,4 “Mustn’t  we  say,  then,  that  the  heretical  sophists  are  no  more  than forgers  of  images  of  truth,  who,  like  painters,  know  nothing  of  truth?  For painters  attempt  to  portray  shipwrights,  boats  and  pilots  without  knowing how  to build  or pilot  ships.20,5 “Now then, let’s scrape their paint off, <if> you will, to convince those who, like children, admire such paintings that neither is this ship a ship, nor this pilot a pilot. It is a wall with its surface decorated for pleasure’s sake with paint  and  pictures,  and  the  artists  who  made  these  things  with  their  paints are  imitators,  not  of a  ship  but of  the  image of  a  ship and  pilot.”20,6 “For one  who is  eager  to hear  you, your  introduction is  lengthy.” “Lengthy, my friend, but useful. If one were to remove the words ofinspiredscripture which these people have daubed on their opinion with bright colors for their own deception, and have arrogantly called righteousness and truth when  they  know  nothing  about  righteousness,  how  scornfully  do  you  think they would  be  treated if  they were  stripped of  such  names?”“Very,”  replied Auxentius.20,7 “Would  you  like  to  be  the  leader  on  this  journey,  Auxentius,”  I  said, “or  should  I?”“By  rights  you  should,” he  said, “since  you’re initiating  the discussion.”
21,1 “All  right,  it  was  said—come  on,  let’s  examine  Aglaophon’s  mind  a bit,  going  in  order  from  the  beginning.  It  was  said  that  because  of  its  trans-gression the soul has assumed this body we wear, after living blissfully with-out it in former times. (2) For < he said > that the skin tunics are the bodies in which it has been the soul’s lot to be shut up, to be punished for their deedsby carrying corpses. Or wasn’t this what you said first, Doctor, at the beginning? Come, if  you  think I’ve  forgotten  something, remind  me.”20,3 “There’s  no  need  to  remind  you  of  it;  this  was  exactly  what  I  said  at the  beginning.”20,4 “Oh? As you went on, didn’t you also say repeatedly that, because of its  preoccupation  with  adornment,  comfort,  and  the  other  temptations  that accompany  the  craving  of  the  belly,  the  body  is  a  hindrance  to  our  under-standing  and  knowledge  of  the  true  reality?  And  further,  that  it  is  the  cause of blasphemies and all sorts of sins, since by itself, apart from a body, a soul cannot sin at all? (5) And therefore the soul must remain free and devoid of a body after its departure, so that it may be without sin and transgression in the  heavens,  where,  too,  it  will  hold  converse  with  the  angels.  For  this  body is the soul’s accessory and abettor in pollution and sin; (6) there is no way a soul  can  sin  without  a  body.  Hence,  for  its  preservation  without  sin  forever, the  soul  will  never  again  receive  the  body,  to  incline  it  to  corruption  and unrighteousness here below.”21,7 “Yes, this  was also  said.”“Oh?”  I said.  “And  do  you think  you’ve said  this well  and rightly?”“What  difference  does  it  make  to  you?”  said  Algaophon.  “But  you  aren’t refuting my  argument.”21,8 “No  difference,”  said  I,  “but  I  want  to  see  your  argument  tested  by your  own  words.”“I  spoke  well  and  rightly,”  he said.“But  if  someone  contradicts  and  disagrees  with  himself,  do  you  think  his case  is put  well and  rightly?”“Indeed not!”21,9 “Do you  think he’s  clumsily pretending  to the  truth?” “The  worst  of  anyone,” he  said.“Then you don’t approve of someone who plays the tune of his words with a  false note?”“I  sure don’t!”21,10 “Then  you  can’t  possibly  approve  of  yourself,  because  you’re  speak-ing  clumsily.  You’ve  allowed  that  souls  have  strayed  from  God’s  command-ment and sinned without bodies, and have said that God gave them the skin
tunics  later  because  of  their  wrongdoing  so  that  they  would  be  punished  by carrying corpses—interpreting ‘tunics’ to mean the bodies. But in the course of your argument you forget your original proposition and say that, by itself, the soul can’t sin. (11) Sinning is in no sense its nature; the body has become its accessory in evils of all sorts. Thus it will be without a body for all eternity, so  that  it  may  never  again  be  incited  to  wickedness  as  it  was  before  by  the body. (12) And  yet  you  had  first  said  that  the  soul  had  sinned  in  Paradise before  it  had  a  body,  when  it  was  still  blessed  and  free  from  pain.  For  once its  sin  had  been  strengthened  because  of  its  obedienceto  the  serpent,  the soul  was  given  the  body  as  a  prison  in  punishment  for  its  transgression  of the  commandment.21,13 “Thus either your former or your latter statement is incorrect. Either the soul sinned before it had a body and won’t be any more of a sinner even if  it  doesn’t  get  one,  and  your  blather  about  the  body’s  not  rising  is  worth-less. Or else it sinned with a body, and the skin tunics can’t be considered to be  bodies. (14) For  the  man  clearly  broke  the  divine  commandment  before the  tunics  were  made;  indeed,  the  tunics  were  made  to  cover  the  nakedness which had resulted from their sin. (15) But do I convince you, and do you see that  you’ve  offered  contrary  propositions’?  Has  this  been  made  clear  to  you, Aglaophon,” I  asked, “or  don’t  you  understand what  I  mean yet?”21,16 “Iunderstand,”  he  said,  and  don’t  need  to  hear  anything  twice;  I failed  to  notice  that  I  spoke  incorrectly.  If  I  allowed  that  the  skin  tunics  are bodies, I was obliged to admit that the soul had sinned even before it entered a  body, (17) for  the  transgression  came  before  the  making  of  the  tunics.  For the tunics are made for them because of the transgression, the transgression isn’t  committed  because  of  the  tunics.  And  because  of  this  admission  I  had to  agree  that  this  body  is  not  an  accessory  to  evil,  but  that  the  soul  in  itself is  responsible.21,18 “Thus the soul will sin even if it doesn’t get the body, since even before it  did,  it  sinned  without  a  body.  And  it  is  foolish  to  say  that  the  body  cannot come  back  to  life  for  fear  of  its  becoming  the  soul’s  accessory  in  sin. (19) For just  as  the  soul  sinned  even  before  it  had  a  body,  so  it  will  sin  after  discard-ing the body, even if it doesn’t receive a body again. On these grounds, then, I must not approve of my or anyone else’s saying that the skin tunics are our bodies.  For if  I  did,  I would  have  to  admit the  truth  of your  argument.”22,1 “But   Aglaophon,”Isaid,   “don’t   you   think   you’ve   made   another error?”“What  error?”
“You  said,” Ireplied,  “that  the  body  has  been  contrived  as  a  prison  and bond for the soul, and this is why the prophet called us ‘prisoners of earth,’ 76 and  David  called  us ‘bound.’ ”7722,2 “I  can’t  answer  you  offhand,” said  Aglaophon.  “But  why  not  discuss it  with someone else?”22,3 And  I—Isaw  that  he  was  embarrassed,  and  afraid  of  losing  the argument.  “Do  you  think  I’m  trying  to  refute  you  from  envy,”  I  said,  “and am  not  eager  to  clear  the  matter  up?  Don’t  flag  under  questioning,  friend. (4) You see that we aren’t talking about unimportant matters, but aboutthe way  in  which  we  are  to  believe.  I  doubt  that  anything  does  a  man  as  much harm  as the  essentials of  the  faith,  if  he should  have a  false  idea of  them.22,578 “Come  on,  face  my  questions  willingly!  Explain  yourself,  and  cor-rect me if you feel I am speaking an untruth, thinking more of the truth than of  me.  For  I  believe  that  to  be  refuted  is  better  than  to  refute,  to  the  same degree  that  to  be  saved  from  harm  oneself  is  better  than  to  save  someone else from harm. (6) Well then, let’s compare our statements and see if there is any  difference  between  them.  The  things  we  are  arguing  about  are  no  small matters,  but  things  which  it  is  better  to  know  about,  and  a  disgrace  not  to. Well  then,  you  don’t believe  that  the  body returns  to  life, but  I  do.”“Precisely,” he  said, “and  this  is  the reason  I have  spoken.”22,7 “And,” I went on, “you said that the body is a prison, dungeon, tomb, burden and  chain,  while I  disagree.”“You’re right,”  he said.22,8 “In  fact,  you’ve  said  that  the  body  is  an  accessory  to  licentiousness, error,  pain,  anger,  and  in  a  word,  all  the  other  evils  that  hinder  the  soul’s improvement  and  do  not  allow  us  to  attain  the  understanding  and  knowl-edge  of  true  reality. (9) For  even  if  we  attempt  a  search  for  some  part  of reality,  darkness  always  falls  and  obscures  our  reason,  and  does  not  permit us a clear view of the truth. For perception by our ears is full of deceit, as you said,  and  perception by  our  sight and  by  our  other senses.”22,10 “Eubulius,”  he  said,  “do  you  see  that  I’m  ready  to  compliment  you whenever you  explain my  words correctly?”23,1 “All  right,  to  get  you  to  compliment  me  some  more—if  you  people think that the body is a prison, it cannot still be blamed for the soul’s wicked-
ness and unrighteousness, but on the contrary, must be considered the cause of  its  moderation  and  discipline. (2) Look  here,  you  can  follow  me  better  in this way. Where do we take people with bodily ailments? To the doctors, don’t we?”“Obviously,” said  Aglaophon.23,3 “And where  do  we take  criminals? Isn’t  it to  the  magistrates?”“Of  course!”“Is  this  so  that  they  will  be  punished  justly  for  what  they  have  done?” I  said.“Yes.”“But  justice  is  the finest  thing there  is?”He  agreed.“But  is one  who gives  a  just judgment  right—for he  is judging  justly?”He  assented.“But  is the  right  thing beneficial?”“Plainly.”23,4 “Then   those   who   are   judged   are   benefited.   Their   wickedness   is removed  because  it  is  prevented  by  their  torments,  just  as  illnesses  are removed  by  surgery  and  pharmacy  at  the  doctor’s.  For  the  punishment  of the criminal is the correction of the soul, which throws off the severe disease of  wickedness.”He  agreed.23,5 “Oh?  Wouldn’t  you  say  that  the  punishments  which  are  proportion-ate to their crimes are imposed with justice on criminals, just as surgery pro-portionate to  their hurts  is  applied  to  patients?”He  nodded.23,6 “Then  one  whose  crimes  deserve  death  is  punished  with  death,  one whose  crimes  deserve  the  lash  is  punished  with  the  lash,  and  one  whose crimes  merit imprisonment is  punished with  prison?”Aglaophon agreed.23,7 “And  the  offender  incurs  the  penalty  of  prison,  blows,  or  some  other punishment  of  the  sort,  so  that  he  will  reform  and  abandon  his  wickedness, like  bent  wood  straightened by hard  blows?”“You’re quite  right,” he  said.23,8 “The  judge  isn’t  punishing  him  for  his  past  crime  but  for  the  future, so  that he  won’t  do  it  again?”“Plainly,” he  said.23,9 “For  it  is  plain  that  prison  eliminates  his  criminal  tendencies  by  not permitting him  to  do as  he  pleases?”“True.”
23,10 “Then  he  is  prevented  from  misbehaving,  since  his  imprisonment does  not  leave  him  free  to  enjoy  his  pleasures.  It  confines  him  and  teaches him  respect  for  what  is  right,  until  such  time  as  he  is  chastened  and  learns good  sense.”“That  is plain,”  said Aglaophon.23,11 “In  that case  imprisonment  is  not accessory  to wrongdoing.”“Evidently not.”“Instead, it teaches good sense and makes men better. It is the prophylac-tic  of the  soul, harsh  and  bitter but  medicinal.”“Plainly so,”  he  said.23,12 “Well   then?   Come,   let’s   examine   the   consequences   once   more. Didn’t  you  grant  that  the  body  is  the  prison  of  the  soul  because  of  its  trans-gression?”“I  did and  I  do,”  he said.23,13 “But  that  the  soul  sins  with  the  body—if  you  think  that  adultery, murder  and impiety,  which the  soul commits  with the  body,  are sin?”He  nodded.23,14 “But we  have agreed  that a  prisoner  cannot commit  crimes?” “We  have,”  he  said.“He   is   prevented   from   committing   them   because   he   is   loaded   with chains?”“Yes.”“And  the flesh  is  the soul’s  prison?”He  nodded.23,15 “And  yet  we  sin  while  we  are  in  the  flesh,  with  the  consent  of  the flesh?”“We  do,”  he  said.23,16 “But a  prisoner  in bonds  can’t sin?”  Here,  too, he  nodded.“For  he is  restrained?”“Yes.”“His  bonds  don’t  permit him  to  sin?”“Obviously not.”23,17 “But the  body  is an  aid  to  sin?”“Yes.”“While the  prison  prevents it?”  He agreed.23,18 “Then,  Aglaophon,” Isaid,  “the  body  is  not  a  prison  on  your  prem-ises  or anyone  else’s. It  is the  soul’s  aid either  way, for  good or  evil.”He  agreed
24,1 “Then,  Aglaophon,  if  this  is  the  case,  defend  your  first  proposition. You  said  previously  that  the  body  is  the  prison,  dungeon  and  bond  of  the soul. And do you see that what you said does not agree with what we are say-ing  now? (2) How  could  it,  my  friend,  if,  on  the  one  hand,  we  must  suppose that  the  flesh  is  a  prison,  but  on  the  other,  that  the  soul  has  it  as  its  partner in crime and its fellow prisoner? This isn’t possible. (3) If the body was given to the soul as a place of torment because of sin, so that the soul in pain may be taught to honor God, how can the body be the soul’s accomplice and part-ner  in  crime?  Imprisonment,  confinement,  chains,  and,  in  a  word,  all  such corrective  punitive  devices  are  inhibitors  of  crime  and  sin  for  the  prisoners. (4) Prison  is  not  prescribed  for  the  wrongdoer  as  an  aid  in  wrongdoing,  so that he will do further wrong, but so that, tortured by his chains, he will stop. It  is  for  this  reason  that  judges  put  malefactors  in  chains. (5) Even  against their will they are kept from evildoing by their shackles; evil is an option, not for  prisoners  but  for free  men  who live  unguarded.24,6 “Man first committed murder like Cain, progressed to unbelief, gave heed  to  idols,  abandoned  God.  And  why  was  the  body  given  to  him  for  a prison?  Or,  after  man  had  transgressed  before  he  had  a  body,  why  would God  give  him  the  body  as  an  aid  to  greater  wickedness? (7) Why  does  God say, ‘Lo, I have set before thee life and death; choose life! Ihave set before thee good  and  evil;  choose  good!’79after  the  making  of  the  prison,  and  ‘If  ye  be willing  and  hearken  unto  me?’80  These  things  were  said  to  a  person  free  to choose, not  a  prisoner under  restraint.24,8 “On  all  grounds,  then,  it  is  established  that  < we  must >  not  regard the  body  as  a  chain,  imprisonment  or  incarceration,  or  souls  as  therefore ‘prisoners  of  earth,81  with  God  condemning  them  to  be  bound  in  chains  of clay. (9) How  can  this  be,  when  there  is  no  proof  of  it?  But  it  is  also  plainly absurd  to  suppose  that  the  body  will  not  accompany  the  soul  in  eternal  life because it is a prison and a bond, to prevent our becoming prisoners forever, as  they  say,  sentenced  to  corruption  in  the  kingdom  of  light. (10) For  once the  assertion  in  which  they  declared  the  flesh  to  be  the  ‘prison  of  the  soul’ has  been  refuted  and  discredited,  the  statement,  ‘The  flesh  will  not  rise  lest we  become  prisoners  in  the  kingdom  of  light’—and  may  this  kingdom  be ours!—is discredited  as well.
25,1 “Well, what other truth must I show to convince the captious, clearer than  what  has  been  said  so  that  they  will  find  it  acceptable?  One  could refute  this  contention  of  theirs  both  by  these  arguments  and  by  many  more. (2) I  shall  prove  in  what  follows,  in  the  course  of  the  discussion,  with  real truths  and  not  with  conjectures,  that  Jeremiah  did  not  call  us  ‘prisoners  of earth’  because  of  our  partnership  with  the  body,  nor  did  David  called  us ‘bound’for  this  reason. (3) As  to  the  skin  tunics  and  the  fact  that  our  first parents  had  bodies  before  the  tunics  were  made  and  still  enjoyed  immortal-ity, and further, that the body cannot be regarded as a prison and dungeon, I  have  made  the  appropriate  remarks,  gentlemen  of  the  jury.  (For  I  sum-mon you to be the judges of my argument, ‘most excellent Theophilus.’)82 As I promised I turn now to the sequel, to give us a clearer view of the things we would like  to  see.”26,1 God,  the  creator  of  all,  brought  all  into  being  in  good  order  like  a great  city,  and  regulated  it  by  his  decree.  Each  element  had  been  joined  in harmony by his will, and all had been filled with various living things, so that the  world  would  grow  to  perfect  beauty.  He  therefore  gave  life  to  all  sorts of  forms—stars  in  the  sky,  birds  in  the  air,  beasts  on  earth  and  fish  in  the water—and  finally,  after  preparing  the  universe  as  a  wonderfully  beautiful home  for  him,  God  brought  man  into  the  world (2) as  a  likeness  answering to his own image. He made him with his own hands like a glorious image in a  noble temple.26,3 For it is understood that whatever God fashioned with his own hand must  be  immortal,  being  the  work  of  immortality. (4) Immortalthings  are made  immortal  by  immortality,  as  evil  things  are  made  evil  by  evil,  and unrighteous  things  unrighteous  by  unrighteousness.  For  unrighteous  deeds are not the work of righteousness, but of unrighteousness. Nor, on the contrary, is righteous behavior the work of unrighteousness but of righteousness—just as  corrupting  is  not  the  work  of  incorruption  either  but  of  corruption,  and immortality not  the work  of corruption  but  of incorruption.26,5 And  in  a  word,  whatever  the  maker  is  like,  the  product  must  neces-sarily  be  made  like,  on  the  same  principle. (6) But  God  is  immortality,  life and incorruption, and man is the work of God. Anything made by immortal-ity  is  immortal;  man  is  therefore  immortal.  This  is  why  God  created  man  in person,  but  ordered  earth,  air  and  water  to  bring  forth  the  other  kinds  of living things.
Man  has  been  truly  said  to  be  neither  a  soul  without  a  body  by nature,  nor  a  body  without  a  soul,  but  that  which,  by  the  union  of  soul  and body,  has  been  compounded  into  the  one  form,  that  of  the  good.  Hence  it  is plain  that  man  was made  immortal, free  of  decay and  diseases.26,8 One may also learn this well enough from the scripture. Of the other creatures  which  are  changed  at  intervals  of  time  by  being  young  and  grow-ing old, it is said, “Let the waters bring forth creeping things”83 and “Let the earth  bring  forth  living  souls  according  to  their  kind,  four-footed  creatures and  creeping  things  and  beasts  of  the  earth  according  to  their  kind.”84  (9) But “Let the earth bring forth’’ is no longer said of man as it was of them, nor “Let the waters bring forth,” nor “Let there be lights.”85 Instead [we read] “Let us make man in our image and after our likeness, and let them have domin-ion over the fish of the sea, and over the birds of the sky, and over all cattle,”86 and  “God  took  dust from  the  earth  and  formed man.”8727,1 Now  then,  so  that  you  too  may  further  understand  the  difference <in> whole and in part between man and the other creatures, and how man ranks next to the angels in honor because of his immortality, let us take this question  up  in  turn  in  accordance  with  the  true  and  orthodox  reasoning. (2) Animation  and  life  were  given  to  the  others  by  their  inhalation  of  the wind  in  the  air,  but  to  man  by  the  immortal  and  all-excelling  essence  itself, for  “God  breathed  into  his  countenance  the  breath  of  life,  and  man  became a  living  soul.88  (3) The  others  were  commanded  to  serve  and  be  ruled,  but man to rule and be the master. The others are given various natural shapes and  forms,  as  many  as  their  tangible,  visible  nature  engenderedat  God’s bidding. (4) Man,  however,  is  given  God’s  image  and  likeness,  and  entirely conformed  to  the  original  image  of  the  Father  and  the  Only-begotten.  “For God  createdman;  in the  image  of God  created he  him.”8927,5 Thus, as sculptors are concerned for their images, God was concerned for  the  preservation  of  his  own  image,  lest  it  be  easily  destroyed. (6) Sculp-tors  not  only  think  of  <the>  beauty  and  loveliness  of  their  pieces,  to  make them wonderfully beautiful, but also plan for their immortality as far as they can,  so  that  they  will  be  preserved  for  a  long  while  without  being  broken.  So
with  Phidias. (7) After  he  had  finished  the  Pisaean  image—it  was  made  of ivory—he  had  oil  poured  in  front  of  the  image  around  its  feet,  to  keep  it  as nearly  immortal  as  possible. (8) Now  if  this  is  so  with  the  makers  of  human handiwork,  did  not  the  supreme  craftsman,  God,  who  can  do  all  things  and even create from nothing, of every necessity see to it that man, his own ratio-nal  image,  was  wholly  indestructible  and  immortal?  Did  he  allow  what  he had  seen  fit  to  make  in  a  distinctive  way,  and  had  fashioned  with  his  own hands,  in  his  image  and  after  his  likeness,  to  be  most  shamefully  destroyed and  consigned  to  ruin  and  corruption—the  ornament  of  the  world,  for  the sake  of  which  the  world  was  made?  This  cannot  be  said!  Away  with  anyone so  foolish  as  to think  it!28,1 But  probably,  Aglaophon,  you  people  will  not  back  off  because  of what  has  now  been  said,  and  will  reply,  “If  the  creature  was  immortal  from the  beginning,  as  you  say,  how  has  he  become  mortal?  An  immortal  thing must  remain  unalterably  what  it  is,  without  changing  or  degenerating  into something inferior and mortal. This cannot be, since < it is not possible* > for an  immortal < thing to  come  to die.”* >28,2 [But  it  did],  I  shall  say,  because  the  enemy  of  all  good  came,  and from  envy  bewitched  the  man  who  had  been  created  with  the  authority  to choose the good, and had received this ordinance. (3) “For God created man for immortality and made him an image of his own eternity.90 Indeed, “God made  not  death,  nor  doth  he  rejoice  in  the  destruction  of  the  living”91“but through  envy  of  the  devil  death  entered  the  world,”92 as  Wisdom  testified through Solomon.28,4 “Where did death come from, then?” If God did not make death, this has  to  be  asked  again.  “If  it  came  from  envy,  why  was  envy  stronger  than God’s  purpose?”  But this  last  is  blasphemy, we shall  say.28,5 “Where  did  envy  come  from,  then?”  our  antagonist  will  say.  “If from  the  devil,  why  was  the  devil  made?  If  he  was  made,  is  his  maker  then responsible  for  the  existence  of  evil? (6) But  God  is  in  no  way  responsible for  anyone’s  evil.  Thus  the  devil  must  be  uncreated—and  if  uncreated,  also impassible, indestructible and  in  need of  nothing.”An  uncreated  thing  must  necessarily  possess  all  these  attributes,  and  yet the  devil  is  brought  to  nothing  and  chastised.  Now  whatever  is  chastised
undergoes  change  and  suffers,  while  an  uncreated  thing  cannot  suffer.  The devil,  therefore,  is not  uncreated  but  created.28,7 But  if  the  devil  is  created,  and  every  created  thing  originates  from some beginning and has a creator, the devil has a creator. And is the creator uncreated or created? But it must be understood that there is only one uncre-ated,  God.  Nor  can  there  in  any  conceivable  way  be  any  creator  whatever other  than  he.  “I  am  the  first  and  I  am  the  last,” he  says,  “and  besides  me there is  no  God.”9328,8 Nor can anything be changed or created contrary to God’s will. Even the Son acknowledges that “He can do nothing of himself, but what he seeth the Father do. What things soever the Father doeth,” he says, “the Son doeth likewise.”94(9) Surely  God  can  have  no  antagonist,  opponent  or  rival  god. If anything were to oppose God it would cease to exist, for its being would be destroyed by God’s power and might. For only the Maker can destroy—even the  things  that  are immortal.29,1 “Then what is the devil?” you will say. A spirit assigned to matter, as Athenagoras  has  also  said.95  He  was  created  by  God  like  the  other  angels, and  entrusted  with  the  oversight  of  matter  and  material  forms. (2) For  this was the origin of the angels—their creation by God for the care of his created order.  Thus  God  would  have  the  general  and  universal  care  of  the  universe, having  attached  the  supreme  authority  and  power  over  all  to  himself  and guiding  the  whole  on  a  straight  course,  like  a  ship,  with  the  rudder  of  his wisdom;  but  angels  who  have  been  assigned  to  it  would  have  the  care  of  the various parts.29,3 The  other  angels  kept  to  the  tasks  for  which  God  had  made  and appointed them, but the devil mocked at his and became evil in the manage-ment of the things which had been entrusted to him. He conceived envy of us, like  the  angels  who  later  became  enamored  of  flesh  and  consorted  with  the daughters of menfor pleasure. (4) For as in man’s case, so to the angels God has allotted a will free to choose good or evil, either to obey his command, be with him  and  enjoy beatitude, or  else  to  disobey and  be judged.29,5 The  devil  too  was  a  “morning  star”—“How  hath  the  morning  star fallen  from  heaven,  that  riseth  in  the  morning!”96  He  once  rose  with  the angels of light, once was a morning star, but he fell, was dashed to the earth, and  is  [now]  the  governor  of  the  forces  hostile  to  man.  For  theGodhead  is
angry with the proud and balks their arrogant purposes. (6) But it occurs to me  to say  in  verse,Thou serpent,  source and  end  of ills  for  all,Thou bearer  of a  grievous  store  of  woes,Thou false  guide of  a  blind world’s  ignorance,That joyest  in  the wails  and groans  of  men!‘Twas thou  that armed  the  fratricidal  armsOf  kin to  deeds  of lawless  violence.By  thy contriving  Cain first  fouled the  soilWith  secret  bloodshed, and  the  first-formed manFell  to the  earth from  realms  unblemished.30,1 That  is  what  the  devil  is.  But  death  was  devised  for  the  sake  of  con-version,  just  as  blows  were  devised  for  the  correction  of  children  beginning to  read.  For  death  is  nothing  but  the  severance  and  separation  of  soul  from body.30,2 “What,  then,”  you  will  say,  “is  God  the  cause  of  death?”  Again  the same   answer   comes   to   me,   “No   indeed!   Neither   are   teachers   primarily responsible for children’s being hurt by the blows. (3) Death is a good thing, then,  if,  like  blows  for  children,  it  was  devised  for  conversion.  A  word  to  the wise—[Ido  not  mean]  the  death  of  sin,  but  the  death  of  the  sundering  and separation of  the flesh  [from the  soul].”30,4 The  man  was  responsible  for  himself  and  his  own  master,  and  as  I said, had received a free will and the liberty to choose the good. And he had been told, “From every tree in the garden ye may eat, but from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil ye may not eat thereof. For in the day wherein ye eat  of  it,  ye  shall  surely  die.”97  (5) But  once  he  had  given  in  with  regard  to eating  of  it  to  the  devil,  who  was  inciting  his  entrapped  wisdom  to  all  sorts of  disobedience,  he  set  God’s  command  aside.  And  this  became  a  stumbling block,  snare  and  hindrance for  him.25,6 For  God  did  not  make  evil,  and  is  absolutely  not  responsible,  in  any way at all, for any evil. But when any creature which God has created free to observe  and  keep  the  law  he  has  justly  enjoined,  fails  to  keep  that  law,that creature  is  called  evil.  And  to  disobey  God,  by  overstepping  the  bounds  of righteousness of  one’s own  free will,  is  the most  serious harm.25,7 Thus,  because  the  man  was  spotted  and  sullied  by  his  rejection  of God’s  decree,  and  was  smeared  with  the  stains  of  the  great  evils  the  prince of  darkness  and  father  of  deceit  had  brought  forth—and  because,  as  the
scripture  says,  he  was  sentenced  to  hard  labor  so  that  the  devil  could  keep deceiving him and inciting him to unrighteousness—God the almighty, see-ing  that,  as  the  devil  was  a  deceiver,  man  had  been  made  an  immortal  evil by the devil’s plot, (8) made the skin tunics, as though to clothe theman with mortality,  so  that  all  the  evil  which  had  been  engendered  in  him  would  die with the  destruction of  his  body.31,1 These  questions  have  already  been  raised,  and  it  has  been  shown that  the  skin  tunics  were  not  Adam’s  and  Eve’s  bodies.  Still,  let  us  explain it  once  more—it  is  not  a  thing  to  be  said  only  once. (2) The  first  man  him-self acknowledged that he had bones and flesh before the tunics were made, when  he  saw  the  woman  brought  to  him  and  cried,  “This  is  now  bone  of  my bones  and  flesh  of  my  flesh.  She  shall  be  called,  Wife,  for  she  was  taken  out of  her  husband.  For  this  cause  shall  a  man  leave  his  father  and  mother  and cleave unto  his  wife, and  the two  shall be  one  flesh.”9831,3 For  I  have  no  intention  of  putting  up  with  certain  chatterboxes  who do violence to the scripture without a blush, suggest that they were “intelligi-ble bones” and “intelligible flesh,” and turn things topsy-turvy with allegories in one passage after another, as their excuse for saying that the resurrection is not a resurrection of flesh. (4) This though Christ confirms the fact that the scripture  should  be  taken  as  written,  when  he  answers  the  Pharisees’  ques-tion about the divorce of a wife with “Have ye not read that in the beginning the  creator  made  them  male  and  female,  and  said,  For  this  cause  shall  a man  leave  his  father  and  mother,”99 and  so  forth?  How  can  “Be  fruitful  and fill  the  earth?”100  be  taken  merely  of  souls?  Or (5) “God  took  dust  from  the earth  and  formed  the  man”101  which  is  plainly  said  of  the  body  proper?  The soul  was  not  made  of  earth  and  the  heavier  materials. (6) Thus  it  is  estab-lished  with  full  certainty  that  the  man  was  provided  with  a  body  before  the skin  tunics  were  made.  For  all  these  things  are  said  before  his  fall,  but  the making of  the  tunics is  described  after the  fall.31,7 Let us thus return to the investigation of the matter in hand, since we have  given  sufficient  proof  that  the  skin  tunics  were  not  [Adam’s  and  Eve’s] bodies,  but  the  mortality  which  was  made  for  beasts  because  of  the  beasts’ want of reason—for only this explanation remains. (8) Rest assured, the man was  exiled  from  Paradise  for  the  following  reason.  God  did  not  expel  him because he did not want him to pick fruit from the tree of life and live—for he
could have lived forever if he had eaten once more, [a fruit] from [the tree] of life.  God  did  this, as  we  have stated,  to keep  evil  from becoming  immortal.31,9 For  if  it  was  at  all  God’s  will  that  man  die  altogether  without  tast-ing  life,  why  did  God  sent  Christ  from  heaven  to  earth? (10) If  my  opponent should  say  that  God  did  this  because  he  had  changed  his  mind,  his  argu-ment  would  be  feeble  because  it  introduced  a  changeable  God.  But  God  is neither  ignorant  of  the  future  nor  malignant;  indeed,  he  is  supremely  good, and  foreknows  that  which  is  to  come. (11) Thus  God  did  not  expel  the  man to  prevent  his  eating  from  the  tree  of  life  and  living  forever,  but  so  that  sin would be killed first, by death. Then, with sin withered away after death, the man  would  arise  cleansed and  taste of  life.32,1 And  no  idiot  should  gamble  that  these  things  are  meant  in  some other  sense.  For  whoever  decides  that  this  flesh  is  incapable  of  immortality is  indeed  responsible  for  the  ailment  of  his  stupidity,  and  is  a  blasphemer. (2) If it were simply impossible for man to live forever without a body, why is Adam  cast  out  after  the  making  of  the  skin  tunics,  and  kept  from  eating  of the  tree  of  life  and  living? (3) The  prohibition  is  predicated  on  the  assump-tion  that,  if  he  takes  fruit  from  the  tree  of  life  and  tastes  it,  he  can  avoid death.  For  scripture  says,  “And  the  Lord  God  made  tunics  of  skin  for  Adam and  his  wife,  and  clothed  them.  And  God  said,  Behold,  Adam  hath  become as one of us, to know good and evil. And now, lest he put forth his hand and take  of  the  tree  of  life  and  eat  and  live  forever.  And  the  Lord  God  sent  him forth  from  the  delight  of  Paradise  to  till  the  ground  whence  he  was  taken, and  he cast  Adam  out.”10232,4 Thus  the  body  could  have  lived  forever  and  been  immortal  if  it  had not  been  prevented  from  tasting  life.  But  it  was  prevented  so  that  sin  would be put to death with the body and die, but the body would rise washed clean of  sin. (5) As  I  said,  God  made  the  body  mortal  by  clothing  it  with  mortal-ity  to  keep  man  from  being  an  immortal  evil  with  the  conquering  sin  alive in  him  forever—as  it  would  be  if  it  had  sprouted  in  an  immortal  body  and had immortal nourishment. (6) Hence the skin tunics—so that, through the body’s  destruction  and  its  separation  [ from  the  soul],  the  sin  underneath  it would  perish  entirely,  from  the  root  up,  leaving  not  even  the  smallest  bit  of root for  new  shoots of  sins  to sprout  from again.33,1 If a fig tree < has > taken root and grown tall and broad in the beau-tiful  buildings  of  a  temple,  and  has  covered  all  the  joints  of  the  stones  with intricate  roots,  its  growth  cannot  be  halted  until  it  is  uprooted  altogether,
and  the  stones  in  the  places  where  it  sprouted  are  destroyed. (2) For  the stones  can  be  set  back  in  the  same  places  once  the  fig  tree  is  removed,  so that  the  temple  will  be  preserved  and  no  longer  harbor  any  of  the  ills  that were  destroying  it.  But  as  the  fig  tree  has  been  uprooted  altogether,  it  will die. (3) Thus,  with  the  temporary  visitations  of  death,  God,  the  architect, destroyed  his  temple,  man,  who  had  sprouted  sin  like  a  wild  fig—“killing and  making  alive,”103 as  the  scripture  says—so  that,  once  the  sin  had withered  and  died,  the  flesh  would  rise  again  from  the  same  places  like  a temple restored, immortal and unharmed because the sin had perished alto-gether  from  the  ground up.
33,4 While the body is still alive before death, sin of necessity lives within us  and  conceals  its  roots  within  us,  even  though  it  is  checked  on  the  out-side by the cuts of cautions and admonitions. For after his enlightenment no one  can  do  further  wrong;  sin  has  simply  been  removed  from  us  altogether. (5) However,  we  often  find  ourselves  in  sins  even  after  coming  to  faith  and the  water  of  purification.  For  no  one  will  boast  that  he  is  so  free  of  sin  that he  never  even  thinks of  wrong at  all.33,6 Thus,  as  matters  stand,  sin  is  reduced  and  lulled  to  sleep  by  faith, and  cannot  bear  harmful  fruit;  but  it  has  certainly  not  been  destroyed  roots and all. (7) Here we remove its flowerings—evil thoughts, for example—“lest any  root  of  bitterness  trouble  us,”104 and  we  do  not  let  them  open,  opening their  closed  pores  to  suckers.  For  like  an  ax  the  word  chops  sin’s  roots  off  as they  grow  below. Then,  however,  even  the thought  of evil  will be  done  away.34,1 Nor  does  the  text  of  scripture  fail  to  witness  to  this,  for  those  who sincerely  desire  to  hear  the  truth.  The  apostle  knows  that  the  root  of  sin  is still not entirely removed from men, and declares, “I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwelleth no good thing. For to will is present with me, but how to perform  what  is  good  I  find  not.  For  the  good  that  I  would,  I  do  not;  but  the evil which I would not, that do I. If, then, I do that which I would not, it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me.”105 (2) And “I delight in the law of God after the inward man. But I see another law in my members, warring against  the  law  of  my  mind,  and  bringing  me  into  captivity  to  the  law  of  sin which is  in  my  members.”10634,3 Thus  sin  has  not  yet  been  entirely  dug  out  by  the  roots,  but  is  alive. (For it is not wholly dead; how can it be, before the man is clothed with death?) 
[It is alive], to wither and fade with the man, and to be utterly destroyed and perish—like  a  plant,  when  < the  stone >  is  destroyed  in  < the  place >  where, as  I  said,  it  preserved  its  roots  by concealing them.  But  the  man  will  rise again, with  no  further “root  of bitterness”107  lurking within him.34,4 For death and destruction were employed as an antidote by our true protector  and  physician,  God,  for  the  uprooting  of  sin.  Otherwise  evil  would be  eternal  in  us,  like  an  immortal  thing  growing  in  immortals,  and  we  our-selves would live like the diseased for a a long time, maimed and deprived of our native virtue, as persons who harbor the severe diseases of sin in everlast-ing  and  immortal  bodies. (5) It  is  a  good  thing  then,  that  God  has  devised death—this  cure,  like  a  medicinal  purgative,  of  both  soul  and  body—to leave us  altogether spotless  and  unharmed.35,1 Now   then,   since   a   number   of   illustrations   of   such   matters   are needed,  let  us  by  all  means  look  for  them,  and  not  leave  off  until  our  argu-ment  ends  with  a  clearer  explanation  and  proof. (2) It  is  plainly  just  as though  the  best  of  artists  were  to  remelt  a  lovely  likeness  he  had  made  of gold  or  another  material  with  all  its  limbs  in  proportion  for  beauty’s  sake, because  he  suddenly  realized  that  it  had  been  mutilated  by  some  vicious person,  who  injured  the  piece  because,  from  malice,  he  could  not  bear  that it  be  beautiful,  and  reaped  the  empty  fruit  of  envy. (3) With  your  great  wis-dom,  Aglaophon,  observe  that  if  the  artist  did  not  want  the  piece  he  had created with so much zeal and care to be completely ruined and an eyesore, he would be well advised to melt it down again and make it as it was before. (4) If  he  did  not  remelt  and  refashion  it,  however,  but  < merely >  patched and  repaired  it  and  left  it  as  it  is,  the  piece,  which  was  hardened  in  the  fire and  cast  in  bronze,  could  never  be  kept  the  same,  but  would  be  altered,  and diminished in  value.35,5 Thus if he wanted his work to be entirely good and flawless, he must break it up and recast it, so that the flaws, and all the alterations produced in it  by  treachery  and  envy,  would  be  done  away  by  its  destruction  and  recast-ing, but the sculpture restored undamaged and unblemished to its own form, once  more  exactly  like  itself. (6) For  even  if  it  is  dissolved  back  into  its  raw material, in the hands of the same artist the statue cannot be destroyed, but can be restored. Its blemishes and mutilations can be destroyed, however, for they are melted. They cannot be restored, for in every art the best craftsman looks,  not  to  the  ugliness  of  his  work  or  its  accidental  flaws,  but  to  its  sym-metry  and  tightness.
35,7 For  it  seems  to  me  that  God  has  dealt  with  us  in  the  same  way.  He saw  his  handsomest  work,  man,  spoiled  by  the  malicious  plots  of  envy,  and in  his  lovingkindness  could  not  bear  to  leave  him  like  that,  or  he  would  be flawed  forever  and  marred  with  an  immortal  blemish.  He  has  reduced  him to his raw material again, so that all his flaws may be melted and done away with  by  the  refashioning. (8) For  the  remelting  of  the  sculpture  in  my  meta-phor  stands  for  the  death  and  dissolution  of  the  body;  and  the  remodeling and  reshaping  of  the  material  stands  for  the  resurrection. (9) The  prophet Jeremiah  himself  has  already  made  the  same  recommendation  in  the  fol-lowing  passage:  “And  I  went  down  to  the  house  of  the  potter,  and  lo,  he  was making  a  work  upon  the  stones.  And  the  vessel  he  was  making  broke  in  his hands, and again he made it another vessel, as it pleased him to do. And the word of the Lord came unto me saying, Can I not make you as this potter, O house of  Israel? Behold,  as  the potter’s  clay are  ye in  my  hands.”10836,1 Observe  that,  after  the  man’s  transgression,  the  great  hand  of  Goddid not choose to abandon its work forever, like a counterfeit coin, to the evil one who had unjustly harmed it by reason of his envy. Instead it melted and reduced  it  to  clay  once  more,  like  a  potter  reshaping  a  vessel  to  remove  all its  flaws  and  cracks  by  the  reshaping,  but  make  it  once  again  entirely  flaw-less  and  acceptable. (2) “Or  hath  not  the  potter  power  over  the  clay,  of  the same lump to make one vessel unto honor, and another unto dishonor”;109 in other  words—for  I  am  sure  that  this  is  what  the  apostle  means—does  God not  have  the  power  to  reshape  and  refashion  each  of  us  from  the  same  raw material  and  raise  us  each  individually,  to  our  honor  and  glory  or  to  our shame  and  condemnation?  To  the  shame  of  those  who  have  lived  wickedly in  sins,  but  to  the  honor  of  those  who  have  lived  in  righteousness. (3) This was  revealed  to  Daniel  also,  who  says,  “And  many  of  them  that  sleep  in  the dust  of  the  earth  shall  arise,  some  to  eternal  life,  some  to  shame  and  ever-lasting contempt. And they that are wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament.”11036,4 It is not in our power to remove the root of wickedness entirely, but to prevent it from spreading and bearing fruit. Its full and complete destruction, roots and all, is accomplished by God, as I said, at the dissolution of the body; but  its  partial  destruction,  so  that  it  will  not  bud,  is  accomplished  by  our-selves. (5) And  thus  whoever  fosters  the  increase  and  growth  of wickedness
instead,  but  does  not  make  it  as  barren  as  he  can  and  reduce  its  size,  must pay  the  penalty.  For  though  he  had  the  ability  and  the  right  to  do  this,  he chose  to  prefer  the harmful  to the  helpful.37,1  Thus  no  one,  with  wagging  tongue,  may  blame  the  Godhead  for  not giving  each  his  just  reward  for  vice  or  virtue;  the  man  himself  is  at  fault. “Who art thou, O man, that repliest against God? Shall the thing formed say to  him  that  formed  it,  Why  hast  thou  made  me  thus?”111(2) How  can  it? The  man  chose  evil  of  his  own  free  will!  He  may  not  ask  the  God  who  judges < with >  unvaryingly  righteous  decrees,  “Why  hast  thou  made  me  to  be  thus condemned to  torment?’’37,3 For  note  how,  by  deftly  darting  brief  quotations,  like  a  spearman, into  the  body  of  his  words,  Paul  makes  the  interpretation  of  the  readings unclear and extremely difficult, although they are entirely true and orthodox and  contain  nothing  careless  or  evil.112(4) To  those  who  look  into  the words with no zeal but mean-spiritedly, they sometimes seem disjointed and inconsistent;  but  to  those  who  do  this  zealously  and  with  sober  reason,  they are correspondingly full of order and truth. (5) Only a treatise in itself would be  enough  for  a  full  and  accurate  discussion  of  this  at  thistime.  Indeed,  it would  be  ridiculous  to  abandon  your  inquiry  which  has  led  me  to  compose this,  and  shift  to  other subjects.37,6 For  I  have  said  this  because  of  the  justice  which  punishes  willful evildoers.  But  now  that  we  have  made  it  abundantly  clear  that  death  was not  devised  for  man’s  harm  but  <for  his  good* >,  whoever  opens  this  book with a good will must have an understanding of the resurrection of the body. (7)113 How can death not be beneficial, when it destroys the things that prey upon  our  nature?  Even  though  it  is  unpleasant  at  the  time,  while  it  is  being administered, it <is > plainly a medicine, of a very bitter sort, for the patient. (8) But  now  then!  Not  to  make  the  same  points  time  and  again  about  the same things, let us further confirm what we have said from the Song in Deu-teronomy, and  then go  on  to take  up  the rest.38,1 For what does God’s “I shall kill, and I shall make alive; I shall smite and  I  shall  heal,  and  there  is  none  that  shall  deliver  out  of  my  hand,”114mean  to  teach  but  that  the  body  is  first  killed  and  dies,  so  that  it  may  rise and  live  again? (2) It  is  struck  and  shattered  first,  so  that  it  may  be  remade 
sound  and  whole. (3) And  nothing  has  any  power  whatever  to  take  it  from God’s  great  and  mighty  hand  for  ruin  and  destruction—not  fire,  not  death, not  darkness,  not  chaos,  not  corruption. (4) “Who  shall  separate  us  from the  love  of  Christ?”  says  scripture—(“Christ”  means  the  Father’s  Hand  and Word.)  “Shall  tribulation,  or  distress,  or  persecution,  or  famine,  or  naked-ness,  or  peril,  or  sword?  As  it  is  written,  For  thy  sake  are  we  killed  all  day long;  we  are  counted  as  sheep  appointed  to  be  slain.  Nay,  in  all  these  things we  are more  than conquerors  through him  that loved  us.”11538,5 Absolutely  true!  This  serves  as  the  fulfillment  of  “I  shall  kill,  and  I shall  make  alive”—as  I  said—“I  shall  smite  and  I  shall  heal.  “And  there  is no one to “take us,” for our destruction, “from the love of God that is in Christ Jesus.”  Thus  we  are  “reckoned  as  sheep  for  the  slaughter,”  “to  die  to  sin  and live  to  God.”116  So  much  for  this  line  of  inquiry;  here,  once  again,  we  must take  up the  next question.39,1 Suppose that, as my opponent proposes, every procreated thing is ill in  its  origin  and  diet—for  it  increases  in  size  from  what  is  added  to  it,  and becomes  smaller  because  of  what  is  subtracted  from  it.  But  whatever  is  not procreated  is  in  good  health,  since  it  is  not  ill  and  has  no  needs  or  desires. Procreated  things,  however,  desire  both  sex  and  food,  but  to  have  desires  is illness,  while  to  have  no  needs  or  desires  is  health.  And  procreatedthings are ill because they have desires, while things not procreated are not ill. And things  that  are  ill  suffer  from  a  surplus  or  deficiency  of  the  things  which  are added  to  them  or  taken  away  from  them.  Now  anything  that  suffers  both withers and perishes, since it is procreated. But man is procreated. Therefore man  cannot be  impassible and  immortal.39,2 But even as stated, the argument fails. If everything must perish if it is  either  brought  into  being  or  procreated—we  may  as  well  say  it  this  way, because  the  first  man  and  woman  were  not  procreated,  but  were  brought into being, but both angels and souls are brought into being for the scripture says,  “He  maketh  his  angels  spirits”117—then,  on  their  premises,  angels  and souls must perish! (3) But neither angels nor souls perish; they are immortal and  indestructible  as  their  maker  intends  them  to  be.  Man  too,  therefore,  is immortal.39,4 No more satisfactory is the argument that all things will be destroyed completely and there will be no more earth, air and heaven. The whole world
will  be  overwhelmed  with  a  deluge  of  fire,  and  burned  to  ashes  for  its  puri-fication  and  renewal,  but  will  certainly  not  come  to  entire  destruction  and dissolution. (5) If  the  non-existence  of  the  world  is  better  than  its  existence, why  did  God  make  the  poorer  choice  and  create  the  world’?  But  God  made nothing to no purpose or inferior. (6) Thus God ordered the creation in such a way that it would exist and endure, as Wisdom proves by saying, “God hath created  all  things  to  exist,  and  sound  are  the  origins  of  the  world;  in  them is  no  poison  of  destruction.”118  (7) And  Paul  plainly  testifies  to  this  with  his words, “The earnest expectation of the creature waiteth for the manifestation of the sons of God. For the creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him who hath subjected the same in hope, because creation itself  also  shall  be  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  destruction  to  the  glorious liberty  of  the  children  of  God.”119 (8) Here  he  chooses  to  call  this  world  a “creature,” and says that “the creature was made subject to vanity,” but that it  expects  to  be  set  free  from  such  bondage.  For  it  is  not  the  invisible  things that are  enslaved to  corruption, but  these,  the visible  ones.39,9 The  “creature,”  then,  endures,  renewed  once  more  and  in  a  come-lier  form,  and  is  joyous  and  glad  for  the  sons  of  God  at  the  resurrection, though  now  it  groans  for  them  and  shares  their  travail,  while  it  too  awaits our  redemption  from  the  perishability  of  the  body. (10) Then,  when  we  are raised  and  have  shaken  off  the  mortality  of  our  flesh—as  scripture  says, “Shake  off  the  dust,  rise  and  sit  down,  O  Jerusalem”120—and  when  we  are set free from sin, it too will be set free from corruption and no longer enslaved to  “vanity,”  but  to  righteousness. (11) “For  we  know,”  says  scripture,  “that  all creation  groaneth  and  travaileth  together  in  pain  until  now.  And  not  only they,  but  ourselves  also,  which  have  the  firstfruits  of  the  Spirit,  even  we  our-selves groan within ourselves waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of  the body.”12139,12 And  Isaiah  says,  “For  as  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth  which I  make  remain  before  me,  saith  the  Lord,  so  shall  your  seed  and  your  name be.”122 And  again,  “Thus  saith  the  Lord  that  created  the  heavens,  this  God that  formed  the  earth  and  made  it.  He  established  its  bounds,  he  created  it not in vain, but to be inhabited.”123(13) Indeed God has not created the world 
to  no  purpose  or  in  vain,  for  destruction,  as  those  who  think  vain  thoughts would  have  it.  He  has  made  it  to  be,  to  be  inhabited  and  to  abide.  There-fore  heaven  and  earth  must  once  more  be,  after  the  burning  up  and  boiling away of all things. (14) To explain the necessity of this would require an even longer  discussion.  For  after  its  dissolution  the  universe  will  not  be  reduced to  inert  matter,  and  its  state  before  its  establishment.  Nor,  again,  will  it  be reduced  to total  destruction and  decay.40,1 But suppose our opponents say, “If the universe will not be destroyed, why did the Lord say that heaven and earth would pass away? And why did the prophet say that the heaven would perish like smoke, and the earth grow old  like a  garment’?”12440,2  “Because,”  we  shall  reply,  “scripture’s  way  is  to  call  the  world’s change  from  its  present  state  to  a  better  and  more  glorious  one  a  ‘destruc-tion,’  like  the  change  of  anything  to  a  more  glorious  form  when  its  previous form  is  done  away  with;  there  is  no  contradiction  or  anomaly  in  the  sacred scripture. (3)  ‘The  form  of  this  world  passeth  away,’125but  the  world  does not.  Thus  scripture’s  way  is  to  call  the  change  of  a  previous  form  to  a  bet-ter,  and  sometimes  a  lovelier  one,  a  ‘destruction,’ (4) as  one  might  call  the change from one’s form in babyhood to maturity a ‘destruction’ because the stature  of  the  infant  is  changed  in  its  size  and  handsomeness.  “For  when  I was  a  child,  I  spake  as  a  child,  I  understood  as  a  child,  I  thought  as  a  child; but  when  I  became a  man,  I  put away  childish things.”12640,5 We  would  expect  the  creature  to  be  troubled  because  it  is  to  die  in the  conflagration  and  be  created  anew,  but  we  would  not  expect  it  to  per-ish.  Thus  we,  the  newly  created,  shall  dwell  free  from  sorrow  in  the  newly created  world—as  the  hundred  and  third  Psalm  says,  “Thou  shalt  send forth thy Spirit and they shall be made, and thou shalt renew the face of the earth”127—with God at last, the regulator of its mild climate, surrounding it. (6) For  if  there  is  to  be  an  earth  even  after  this  age,  there  is  every  necessity that  it  also  have  inhabitants,  who  will  never  again  die,  marry  and  be  born, but like the angels will unchangingly perform the best of works in immortal-ity. (7) Thus it is silly to ask how bodies can exist then where there will be no air  or earth  or  the rest.41,1 But  if  we  are  to  discuss  such  important  matters  with  confidence, Aglaophon,  something  beyond  what  we  have  said  is  worth  our  looking  into,

since it occasions a great deal of error. (2) After you said that, when the 
Sadducees tested him, the Lord declared that those who attain the resurrec¬ 
tion will be like angels, you added, “But the angels, who have no flesh, are in 
the highest state of beatitude, and therefore also of glory. Thus if we are to 
equal the angels, we, like them, must be withoutflesh. ” (3) But, Sir, you have 
not understood that He who created the universe from nothing and set it in 
order, did not adorn it by allotting the nature of immortals to angels and 
ministers only, but to principalities, authorities and thrones as well. (4) The 
angels are one species and the principalities and authorities are another, 
for there is not [just] one rank, condition, tribe andfamily of immortals, but 
different species, tribes and varieties. The cherubim cannot relinquish their 
own nature and be changed into the form of angels; nor, in turn, can angels 
be changed into some other form. They must be the same as they are and 
have been. 

41,5 But man too, who was charged <at> the first ordering of the uni¬ 
verse to inhabit the world and rule all its denizens—man is immortal and 
will never be changed from his manhood into the form of the angels or any 
of the others. For no more can the angels be changed from their original 
form and turned into that of the others. (6) Christ did not come to announce 
the remaking or transformation of human nature into some other, but its 
change into its original nature before its fall, when it was immortal. (7) Each 
created thing must remain in its own assigned place, so that all may be filled 
with all: the heavens with angels; the thrones with powers; the luminaries 
with ministering spirits; the most sacred places and the pure and undefiled 
lights, with the seraphim who stand beside the great Will which controls the 
universe; and the world with men. (8) But if we grant that men are changed 
into angels, it is time to say that the angels can also be changed into powers, 
and the powers into one thing and another, until the ascending list incurs 
risk . 128 

42,1 But it is not as though God made man inferior or slipped up in the 
process of fashioning him, and like the poorest of workmen later changed 
his mind and decided to make him an angel; or that he meant to make an 
angel at first and could not, but made a man. This is incompetence. (2) If he 
wanted the man to become an angel and not a man, why ever did he make 
him a man and not an angel? Because he couldn’t? < This > is blasphemy! 
(3) But did he put off doing the better thing and do the worse? This too is 
absurd. God neither makes mistakes nor puts off doing a good thing, nor 

Lacks the power [to do it]. He has the power to do both as he wills and when 
he wills, for God is Power. 

42.4 Very well, God created the man at the first and willed that he be a 
man. But if he willed it, and he wills what is good—and if man is good — 
and if man is said to be composed of soul and body—then man will not be 
bodiless [at the resurrection] but embodied, or man will be other than man. 
(5) For the immortal species must all be preserved by God. But man too is 
immortal, for Wisdom says, “God created man for immortality, and made 
him by his own eternity .” 129 The body does not perish, then, for man is body 
and soul. 

43,1 Understand, then, that the Lord meant to teach these very things, 
because the Sadducees did not believe in the resurrection of the flesh. This 
is Sadducean doctrine, and so, to decry the doctrine of the resurrection of 
the flesh, they made up the parable of the woman and the seven brothers, 
and came to him. (The evangelist, of course, added “came to him” himself, 
when he said, “Likewise Sadducees, which say that there is no resurrection, 
came to him .”) 190 (2) Now if there were no resurrection of flesh but only the 
soul were saved, Christ would have agreed that their opinion was good and 
right. But he refutes them instead by saying, “In the resurrection they neither 
marry nor are given in marriage, but are as angels in heaven 131 —(3) not by 
having no flesh, but by neither marrying nor being married butfinally being 
immortal, and among the luminaries. They will be very like the angels in this 
respect — that, like the angels in heaven, we in Paradise will not spend our 
time in weddings and banquets, but in seeing God and enjoying eternal life 
under Christ’s headship. 

43.4 For Christ did not say, “They shall be angels,” but, “They shall be like 
angels”—as [in the scriptural text], “crowned with glory and honor and but 
a Little different from the angels ,” 132 and nearly angels. (5) It is as though 
one were to say that on a balmy, calm night when all was illuminated with 
the moon’s heavenly radiance, the moon shone “like” the sun. We would cer¬ 
tainly not say he was testifying that the moon “was” the sun, but that it was 
“like" the sun, (6) just as a material which is not gold but gold< en> is not 
said to be “gold,” but “like gold." If it were gold, itwould not be called “golden” 
but “gold"; but since it is not gold, but is < almost > gold and Looks like gold, 
it is not called “gold” but “golden. ” 

43,7 Thus, when Christ says that the saints will be as angels in the resur¬ 
rection, we do not understand him to be promising that the saints will actu¬ 
ally be angels in the resurrection, but that they will nearly be angels. (8) And 
it is the height of absurdity to deny the resurrection of bodies because Christ 
declared that the saints will look like angels in the resurrection, although the 
word itself clearly indicates the nature of the event. 

43,9 For “rising" is not said of a thing that has not fallen, but of one that 
has fallen and gets up, as the prophet says, “And I will raise up the taberna¬ 
cle of David that is fallen. ” 133 But the beloved tabernacle of the soul hasfallen 
“to dusty earth , 134 for it is not the undying thing that topples over, but the 
thing that dies. It is flesh that dies, for the soul is immortal. (10) Now then, if 
the soul is immortal and the dead man is a body, those who say that there is 
a resurrection, but not a resurrection of the flesh, are denying that there is a 
resurrection. For it is not the thing that has been standing that rises, but the 
thing that has fallen and dropped, as scripture says, “Doth that which falleth 
not rise, or shall that which turneth away not turn back ?” 135 

44,1 Now the Lord has plainly taught that the soul is immortal, both in his 
own words and through the mouth of Solomon. He has taught it in his own 
words in the story of the rich man and the poor man Lazarus, by showing 
the one at rest in Abraham’s bosom after the discarding of his body, but the 
other in torments which he described in conversation with Abraham. (2) And 
he taught it through Solomon in the book entitled Wisdom, where it is written 
that “The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God and there shall no 
torment touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die and their 
departure was taken for misery, and their going from us for utter destruc¬ 
tion. But they are in peace, and their hope is full of immortality .” 136 (3) Thus 
resurrection is of a body, not of a soul. One does not raise a person who is on 
his feet but a person who is lying down, just as not a healthy individual, but 
a sufferer is doctored. 

44,4 And if anyone insists that resurrection will apply to the soul and not 
the flesh, this is a lot of foolishness and nonsense. One must first prove a 
corresponding decay and dissolution of the soul to prove its resurrection as 
well, and not by talking nonsense but by the clear statement of a plain fact. 
(5) But no matter, let us allow him to declare the soul mortal. Here we must 
make one of two assumptions. Either the Lord’s declaration is untrue when 

he teaches that the soul is immortal, and whoever says that it does not per¬ 
ish is lying; or else it perishes, and Christ is < telling > a lie by teaching both 
in his story of the rich man and the poor man and in the vision of Moses 
and Elijah, that it is indestructible and immortal. (6) But the Lord has never 
contradicted himself or lied. He was not showing an image or simulacrum 
of Elijah and Moses on the mount with the intent of deceiving the apostles, 
but showing truthfully what they were. So even the slowest learner, as we 
might say, can Learn that he is immortal, and affirm the indestructibility of 
the soul 

45.1 Resurrection, then, is a resurrection of the flesh and not of the soul, 
so that the tabernacle of David which has fallen into decay may arise and, 
risen and rebuilt, remain undamaged and unfallen for all eternity. (2) For 
God was not concerned that David’s stone house be built to give him a fine 
home in the kingdom of heaven, but that his flesh, the tabernacle of the soul, 
be built, which he had fashioned with his own hands. 

45,3 With your immense wisdom, Aglaophon, you must regard it in this 
way. You are sure to understand it very easily if you think of the image of 
going to sleep and getting up. If going to sleep results from waking and get¬ 
ting up results from sleeping, and this is a rehearsal for death and resur¬ 
rection—“to the twins, sleep and death!” 137 — then, since rising results from 
[the sleep of] sleepers, the quickening to life of the flesh must be the result of 
death. (4) For if waking issues from sleep, and the sleeper certainly does not 
just go on sleeping in the same posture but gets up again, so life will issue 
from death; and the man who dies surely does not remain so because he dies. 
(5) For if waking issues from sleep, rising from falling and rebuilding from 
destruction, how can we possibly not expect the resurrection of the fallen and 
the quickening of the dead? 

45,6 And observe, if you will, not only from sleeping and rising but from 
seeds and shoots as well, how the resurrection is proclaimed in them all. Note 
how seeds are put into the ground “bare, ” 138 as the scripture says, without 
any flesh, and, rendered back again mature. If seeds died and decayed, but 
there were no more revival and sprouting of the seeds, why would it not be 
the lot of all things to be dissolved in death? 

46.1 But for now, “most excellent Theophilus ,” 139 and you other judges 
of the debate, I shall forbear to say more about this. Let us take up his next 

points as well, since they are far from satisfactory. (2) For again, in my 
opponent’s forced, unnatural interpretation of the prophecy in the sixty-fifth 
Psalm, God takes sinners’ actual souls, and as punishmentfor their sins puts 
them < into > the flesh as into a “snare .” 140 But rather than orthodoxy, this is 
absurdity. (3) If the souls had possessed bodies before the transgression, as 
I have already pointed out, why would they be stuffed into bodies later, after 
their transgression, <as> into a snare? There was no time for them to sin 
before they got their bodies. 

46,4 It makes no sense to say one minute that the souls have sinned 
because of the body, and the next that the body was made for condemnation 
as a prison and a snare, because they had sinned. (5) If they sinned because 
of the body, then the body was with them from the first, even before the sin. 
For how could they sin because of something which was not yet in existence? 
(6) But again, if the body itself is regarded as a snare, chains and a prison, 
the combination [of body and soul] cannot be responsible for the sin; it must 
be the soul alone. For bonds, snares and chains are made for the sinner after 
his sin. 

46,7 But we have agreed that the body cannot be the prison of the soul, 
since the body cooperates with either sort of behavior, right or wrong, but a 
prison prevents wrong behavior. (8) So as I say, one of two alternatives must 
be true. Either we sinned with a body from the first, and can find no time 
when we were without a body; and the body shares the responsibility for good 
and evil actions with the soul. Or else we sinned when we were without a 
body, and the body is not responsible for evil at all. (g) And yet the soul can¬ 
not be mastered by irrational pleasure without a body; but our first parents 
were mastered and snared by irrational pleasure. Thus even before its sin, 
the soul was accompanied by a body. 

46,10 As to the unthinkability of the body’s being made as a prison to 
punish the transgression, leaving the soul, as our opponents say, with the 
unmitigated, constant torture of carrying a corpse, I believe I have now given 
a full demonstration of this with every possible proof. (11) Thus it is untenable 
and unacceptable to make of the body a snare and chains, and say that God 
brings the souls into the snare as punishment, after casting them down from 
the third heaven for their transgressions of his commandment. 

46,12 For what could one be thinking of to believe the things they have 
so rashly said? And this although, despite their forced interpretation of it, 
the psalm does not have this meaning. I shall quote its actual words to show 

what fiction their exposition is, since they have no desire to understand the 
scriptures correctly. 

46,13 The psalm goes something like this: “Thou hast proved us, 0 God, 
thou hast tried us like as silver is tried Thou broughtest us into the snare, 
and laidest tribulations upon our back. Thou sujferedst men to ride over 
our heads. We went through fire and water, and thou broughtest us out to 
refreshment .” 141 (14) And they add at once, “This is said by souls which have 
been cast down from the third heaven, where Paradise is, into the snare of 
the body as into a contest.” For they say that "We went through fire and 
water” may mean either the soul’s passage from the womb into the world, 
since it has its dwelling in the midst of much fire and moisture—or else it 
may mean the soul’s fall from the heavens into the world, when < it > passes 
into the world through the fire, and the waters above the firmament. 

46,15 I have decided to stand up to these people. Now then, Aglaophon, 
answer for them yourself [and tell «s] what they will say. (47,1) For in the 
first place, Paradise, from which, in the person of our first ancestor, we 
were expelled, is obviously a particular place on this earth, set apart for the 
untroubled rest and residence of the saints. < This > is plain from the fact 
that the Tigris and Euphrates, and the other rivers that issue from it, can be 
seen here inundating our land with theirflooding. (2) They do not pour down 
in a cataract from the sky; the earth could not even sustain such a weight of 
water pouring down all at once from on high. 

47,3 Nor, to those who can recognize the nuances of words, is the apos¬ 
tle suggesting that Paradise is in a third heaven. He says, “I know < such a 
man > caught up to the third heaven; and I know such a man, (whether in the 
body or out of the body, God knoweth), that he was rapt away to Paradise. ” 142 
(4) He is declaring that he has seen two great revelations and been taken up 
visibly twice, once to the third heaven and once to Paradise. “I know such a 
man caught up to the third heaven” is proof that a particular revelation was 
shown him in the third heaven, when he was caught up. (5) And the next 
sentence, “And I know such a man, (whether in the body, or out of the body), 
< rapt away > to Paradise,”proves that one more revelation was shown him 
in Paradise. 

47,6 It isjabber and rant, then, to speak of the souls’being cast down from 
the heavens, passing through the sources of fire and the waters above the 
firmament, and falling into this world. (7) Besides, Adam was not expelled 

from the heavens, butfrom the Paradise planted in the east, in Eden. For his 
transgression did not precede his embodiment, as I have shown sufficiently 
already, and this body is not a snare. The transgression came after the soul’s 
union with the body, for man is a composite of the two; and the fall from 
Paradise took place here. (8) But he (Origen?) did not examine the passage 
with any care at all, Aglaophon. He employed his skill in things which are 
not without risk, and set out to interpret the psalm in accordance with the 
opinions of low people, of whom Iforbear to say more. 

48,1 But now that I have come to the point of correcting their depravity, 
I should also like to explain to them the reason for this prophecy, “Thou 
hast proved us, 0 God. Thou hast tried us with fire as silver is tried .” 143 (2) 
The martyrs, during their trials, were amply tested by the assaults of their 
tortures—for the most part, the prophecies are fulfilled in our faith. They 
thank God that they have fought the battle out honorably and with great 
courage, and say to him, “Thou hast proved us, 0 God. Thou hast tried us 
with fire as silver is tried," as though God, bent on victory in the true Olym¬ 
pics, tested them with many sufferings, enabling them to win greater glory 
in his eyes. 

48,3 And see how Solomon calls out in praise of martyrs, in plain agree¬ 
ment with these words—-for the line does not go uncorroborated by the 
testimony of other scriptures. “God proved them and found them worthy of 
himself. As gold in the furnace he tried them and received them as an whole 
burnt offering of sweet savor. And in the time of their visitation < they shall 
shine >.” (4) And before that he had said, “And though they are punished in 
the sight of men, their hope is full of immortality. And being a little chastened 
they shall be greatly rewarded .” 144 

48.5 Moreover, in the hundred and twenty-third Psalm it is the martyrs 
who sing “If the Lord had not been in our midst when men rose up against 
us, they had swallowed us up alive. The water had drowned us, our soul had 
passed through a torrent, our soul had passed through bottomless water. 
Blessed be the Lord, who hath not given us for a prey unto their teeth. Our 
soul was delivered as a sparrow from the snare of the fowlers. The snare is 
broken and we are delivered .” 145 

48.6 There are two choirs of victorious martyrs, one of the New Testament 
and the other of the Old, who with one accord sing their antiphonal hymn to 

God, their champion and the King of all: “Thou hast proved us, 0 God, thou 
hast tried us with fire as silver is tried. Thou broughtest us into the snare, 
thou laidest crushing burdens upon our backs .” 146 Those [burdens] were the 
tribunal of the heathen, or the tortures in which they were hard pressed by 
crushing and burning. (7) For scripture says, “Test me, 0 Lord, and prove 
me, try my reins and my heart. ” 141 

48,8 Well might Abraham say, “Thou hast proved us, 0 Lord; thou hast 
tried us by fire as silver is tried, ” 148 after hearing “Abraham, spare thy son, ” 149 
and throwing his sword away. (9) His heart had ached for his only son, 
though he honored God’s command above < his child >. After Job’s flesh had 
run with filth and his friends had reproached him, and after his body was in 
pain, well might Job say, “Thou hast set tribulations before us, 0 Lord, that 
thou mayest try us as gold in the furnace ,” 150 on hearing God ask him from 
the whirlwind, “Or thinkest thou that I have dealt with thee otherwise than 
that thou mightest be found righteous ?” 151 (10) And well might the three 
children in the furnace, sprinkled with dew to prevent their consumption by 
the fire, say, “Thou hast proved us, 0 God, thou hast tried us with fire as the 
silver is tried. We went through fire and water, and thou broughtest us out 
to a place of refreshment .’’ 152 

48,11 Grant, 0 almighty God, the great, the eternal, the Father of Christ, 
that in thy day I too, Methodius, may pass unharmed through the fire and 
the waters turned to fuel, escape their onslaughts, and say, “I went through 
fire and water, and thou broughtest me out to refreshment.” (12) For thy 
promise to those who love thee is, “If thou passest through the water I am 
with thee, and the rivers shall not overwhelm thee. If thou passest through 
the fire thou shalt not be burned; flame shall not scorch thee .” 155 But so 
much for the exposition of the psalm. 

49,1 But further, we must examine the argument in which, like sleepers 
dreaming many impostures, they declare that Paul said, “I was alive without 
the Law once, ” 154 and loudly insist < that > by his life “before the command¬ 
ment" he meant his life in the first man < in Paradise >, before the body. And 
the words he adds, “But lam fleshly, sold under sin ,” 155 confirm this. (2) For 
the man could not have been ruled and mastered by evil, and sold to it for 
his transgression, if he had not become fleshly; in itself, the soul is immune 
to sin. And thus, after first saying “I was alive without the Law once,” Paul 
acutely added, “But I am fleshly, sold under sin." 

49,3 Awe and consternation overcame the masses when they said these 
things, but now that the truth has come to light it is plain, not only that 
they have gone far wrong, but that they have ascended even to the height 
of blasphemy. (4) By granting that the souls had lived without bodies before 
the commandment, and supposing them completely immune to sin in them¬ 
selves, they have once more demolished their own argument — or, far more, 
their own selves. For they make it out that the bodies < were given > to the 
souls later, as a punishment, because they had sinned before they had 
bodies. And indeed they have been moved to abuse, and compare the body 
with a prison and chains, and < set about * > saying other silly things. 

49,5 In fact, as has been said, the precise opposite is true; before the sin 
the soul must have a body. For if the soul in itself were immune to sin, it 
would not sin at all before it had a body. (6) But if it sinned, it cannot in 
itself be immune to sin, but must even be susceptible and prone to it. And 
therefore — again—it will sin even without getting the body, just as it sinned 
before it got one. 

49,7 But why did it get a body at all later on, after it had sinned? Why 
did it need a body? If it was for torture and pain, why does it revel with the 
body instead, and behave licentiously? (8) And why does it plainly even have 
the freedom to make choices in this world? For here it is in our power to 
believe and not to believe, to do right and to sin, to do good and to do evil. 

49,9 Moreover, how can the judgment still be on its way, in which God 
rewards everyone according to his works and behavior? Why not suppose 
that it is here already, if the soul’s birth and entrance into a body is its judg¬ 
ment and retribution, whereas its death and separation from the body is its 
liberation and refection? For in your view it was put into a body as judgment 
and condemnation, for sinning before it had a body. (10) But my argument 
has more than amply shown that it is inadmissible to regard the body as the 
soul’s torture chamber and chain. 

50,1 To end our discussion of this here, one would need only to show from 
the scripture itself that, < even > before his transgression, the first man was 
composed of body and souL I too shall go over the heads of this now, trying 

< only*> to correct the bases of their arguments, and thus not exceed the 
Length suitable for speeches. 

50,2 For you can see at once, gentlemen of the jury, that as the words 
which follow it indicate, the verse from Romans, “I was alive once without the 
Law ,” 156 cannot apply to the life they claim the soul had before the body — 
even though, because he suffers from a completely incurable childhood ail¬ 
ment, this good physician of the texts forcibly changed the sense as he saw 
fit by removing the next lines. (3) For instead of keeping bodies’ limbs next 
to their naturaljunctures andjoints, and leaving the appearance of the body 
just right, as nature intended, he mutilated it, like a Scythian mercilessly 
hacking an enemy’s limbs offfor his destruction, by ignoring the order of 
scripture. 

50,4 “All right, ” they will say, “ifyou have proved that this is not what they 
mean, why did the apostle make these declarations?” 

“Because he regarded the ‘commandment’ as ‘law,”’ I would reply. “(Let us 
grantfirst that, as you suppose, he called the commandment an actual ‘law. j 
But Paul did not suppose because of this that, before the commandment, our 
first parents also lived without bodies; he supposed that they lived without 
sin. (5) Indeed the time between their creation and the commandment, dur¬ 
ing which they lived without sin, was short—[this time during which] they 
Lived, not without bodies but with bodies. Thus they were expelled directly 
after the commandment, after a very brief youth in Paradise. ” 

50,6 But suppose that someone seizes on the line which says, “When we 
were in the flesh, the motions of sins which were by the Law did work in our 
members, ” believes that Paul is accusing and repudiating the flesh; and sup¬ 
pose that he brings up all the other things of this kind that Paul said, (7) such 
as, “that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, which walk not 
after the flesh but after the Spirit .” 151 Or, “For they that are after the flesh do 
mind the things of the flesh, but they that are after the Spirit, the things of 
the Spirit. For to be fleshly minded is death; but to be spiritually minded is 
life and peace. Because the fleshly mind is enmity against God, for it is not 
subject to the law of God, neither again can it be. < So then they that are in 
the flesh cannot please God >. But ye are not in the flesh but in the Spirit .” 156 
(8) We should ask him whether the apostle, and the persons to whom he wrote 

this, had already departed this life, if he was here decrying, not life lived in 
fleshly terms, but the flesh itself-—or whether he was still in the flesh. 

50,9 But it cannot be said that he sent this when he was not in the flesh. 
Both he and the addressees were plainly in the flesh. But in that case how 
can he say, “When we were in the flesh the motions of the sins that were by 
the Law did work in our members,” as though neither he himself, nor the 
addressees, were still in the flesh? (10) He is speaking not of the flesh itself but 
of a dissolute life. It is his habit to call a person who lives such a life “fleshly," 
just as he calls one who is hardened to the beholding of the truth and the 
light of the mystery, “soulish." 

50,11 For [on their premises] they should say that neither can the soul 
ever be saved! Scripture says, “The soulish man receiveth not the things of 
the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him. But he that is spiritual 
judgeth all things .” 159 (12) < Thus > in that case a soulish and a spiritual 
man are introduced, and the spiritual < is adjudged* > as saved while the 
soulish < is adjudged* > as lost, but this does not mean that the soul perishes 
and everything besides the soul is saved. So here, (I.e., at Rom. 5:8-9) when 
Paul says that the fleshly, and those who are in the flesh, must perish and 
cannot please God, he is not striving for the destruction of the flesh, but the 
destruction of the fleshly mode of life. 

50,13 And further on, when he says, “They that are in the flesh cannot 
please God," he adds at once, “But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if 
so be that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you. ” 160 (14) And shortly after that, 
“But because the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwelleth in 
you, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal 
bodies by his Spirit that dwelleth in you. Therefore, brethren, we are debtors, 
not to the flesh to live after the flesh. For if ye live after the flesh ye shall die; 
but if ye, through the Spirit, do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. " 161 
As we must note, he maintained that the body’s appetite for pleasures is put 
to death, and not the body itself. 

51,1 But if they argue, “Then why is it said that ‘The mind of the flesh is 
enmity against God, for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can 
it be ?’” 162 we must reply that here too they are mistaken. (2) Paul was not 
suggesting that the flesh itself cannot be subject to the law of God, but that 
the “mind” of the flesh cannot be, and this is different from the flesh. 

51,3 It is as though, he were to say, “The impurity in poorly refined silver 
is not subject to the craftsman for manufacture as a household vessel. It can¬ 
not be; it must be removed from the silver first, and melted out.” (4) And he 
was not claiming because of this that the silver cannot be wrought into a 
serviceable vessel, but that the copper in the silver, and its other impurities, 
cannot be. (5) Thus when he spoke of the “mind of the flesh, ” he did not mean 
that the flesh cannot be subject to the law of God, but that the “mind” that is 
in the flesh cannot be—its impulse to incontinence, for example. Elsewhere 
he sometimes called this the “old leaven of malice and wickedness, " 163 and 
urged that it be entirely removedfrom us. But sometimes he called it the “law 
which warreth against the law of my mind and bringeth it into captivity. ” 164 

51.6 For in the first place, if he meant that the flesh itself cannot be sub¬ 
ject to the law of God, no just judge could blame us for licentious behavior, 
banditry, and all the other deeds we perform or do with the body—there is 
no other way of refraining from sin—then it is not true that the body cannot 
be subject to the law of God! How could the body be blamed for living up to 
its own nature? 

51.7 But besides, neither could the body be brought to purity or virtue, if it 
were not in its nature to be subject to the good. For if the nature of the flesh is 
such that it cannot be subject to the law of God, but righteousness is the law 
of God, and prudence, then no one at all could ever be a virgin or continent. 
( 8 ) But if there are virgins and continent persons, but continence is achieved 
by the subjection of the body—there is no other way of refraining from sin — 
then it is not true that the body cannot be subject to the law of God. (g) How 
did John subject his body to purity? Or Peter to sanctity? And why does Paul 
say, “Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, that ye should obey it 
in the lusts thereof. Neither yield ye your members as instruments of unrigh¬ 
teousness unto sin: but yield yourselves unto God, as those that are alivefrom 
the dead, and your members as instruments of righteousness unto God ”? 165 
And again, “For as ye have yielded your members servants to uncleanness 
and to iniquity, unto iniquity; even so now yield your members servants to 
righteousness unto holiness. ” 166 

52,1 Thus he knew that this tabernacle can be put to rights and assent to 
the good, so that the sins in it can be put to death. (2) Even with us, how can 
a man be the servant of righteousness if he does not first subject his fleshly 

members so that they will obey not sin but righteousness, and Live worthily of 
Christ? Sinning and refraining from sin are accomplished through the body, 
and the soul employs it either as an instrument of virtue or an instrument 
of wickedness. 

52,3 For if “Neither fornicators, not idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effem¬ 
inate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, 
nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners can inherit the kingdom of 
God” 167 —(4) and if these things are accomplished by the body and derive 
their strength from the body, and no one is justified without overcoming 
them first—and if the one who overcomes them is the one who inclines to 
prudence andfaith—then the body is subject to the law of God. For prudence 
is the law of God. 

52,5 Thus the apostle did not say that the flesh is not subject to the good 
but that the mind of the flesh is not, removing, as it were, the flesh’s desire 
for immoderations, just as he removed the soul’s desire for evil (6) In his ear¬ 
nest effort to purge even the intemperance of gluttony, teaching us that such 
desires and pleasures must be utterly eliminated, (7) and shaming those who 
believe that luxury andfeasting are life—persons “who regard their belly as 
God ,’’ 168 who < say >, “Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die ,” 169 and 
who spend their time like greedy cattle on nothing but feeding and dining-he 
said, “Meats for the belly and the belly for meats: but God will destroy both 
it and them. ” 170 And then he added, “Now the body is not for fornication, 
butfor the Lord; and the Lordfor the body. And God hath both raised up the 
Lord, and will raise up us by his power. What? Know ye not that your bodies 
are the members of Christ? Shall I then take the members of Christ and make 
them the members of an harlot? God forbid! What? Know ye not that that 
which is joined to an harlot is one body? For two, saith he, shall be one flesh. 
But he that is joined to the Lord is one spirit. Flee fornication. Every sin that 
a man doeth is without the body; but he that committeth fornication sinneth 
against his own body. What? Know ye not that your body is the temple of the 
Holy Ghost which is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own? 
For ye were bought with a price: therefore glorify God in your body .” 171 

53,1 Note that the apostle made these statements because the body can 
< be subject > to the law of God, and can be immortal if it is kept free of 

the fuel of intemperance, and never soiled by forbidden stimulations of the 
passions. (2) For what else is “joined to an harlot ,’’ 172 has relations with her, 
becomes one flesh by the junction and union of their members, but this exter¬ 
nal body with which ail the sins of sex and passion are committed? (3) This 
is why Paul said, “Every sin that a man doeth is without the body; but he 
that committeth fornication sinneth against his own body .” 112 (4) Vanity, 
unbelief, anger and hypocrisy are sins of the soul, but fornication, passion 
and luxury are sins of the body. With these the soul can neither take refuge 
in the truth nor the body be subject to the teachings of prudence; both will 
slip away from the kingdom of Christ. 

53,5 And therefore if our bodies, when kept holy, are the “temple of 
the Spirit that dwelleth in us ” 174 and “The Lord is in the body, ” 175 and the 
members of the body are the members of Christ, the body is subject to the 
divine law and “can inherit the kingdom of God .” 176 (6) For “He that raised 
up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit 
that dwelleth in you ,” 177 so that “This mortal shall put on immortality and 
this corruptible shall put on incorruption, and death will be swallowed up in 
victory .” 172 (7) For the apostle was not discussing some other body here on 
earth, but this body which dies and is put to death, and with which fornica¬ 
tion and other sins can be committed. 

54,1 But what if they surmise that there is a difference between “body" 
and “flesh"—to allow them this argument as well—and suppose that “body" 
is something different and invisible, < the property > of the soul, as it were, 
but “flesh” is this external, visible body? We must reply that it is not only Paul 
and the prophets who understand this flesh as “body.” Others do as well, 
< pagan > philosophers, who are the most particular about the accuracy of 
terms. (2) If our opponents will also make a scientific investigation of this, 
“flesh" is the right word—certainly notfor the whole mass of our tabernacle, 
but for some part of the whole, like the bones, sinews and veins. The whole, 
though, is “body.” And physicians, who deal with precision with the nature of 
bodies, understand “body" to mean this visible body. 

54.3 Plato too, moreover, understands “body” to mean this actual < body >. 
Thus Socrates said in the Phaedo, “Do we suppose that death is anything 
other than < the > soul’s departure from the body? And when the body has 
begun to exist separately by itself, apart from the soul, and the soul apart 
from the body, this is death. ” 179 

54.4 Did not the blessed Moses—we come now to the Lord’s scriptures — 
understand “body” to mean the body we see, and say in the purifications 
that whoever touches something unclean “shall wash his clothes and bathe 
his body in water, and be unclean until even ?” 180 ( 5 ) And what about Job? 
Did he too not understand “body" to mean this thing that dies, when he said, 
“My body is sullied with the rottenness of worms ?” 181 ( 6 ) Solomon too said, 
“Wisdom will not enter into a soul that deviseth evil, nor make its abode in a 
body guilty of sin. ” 182 And in Daniel it is said of the martyrs, “The fire had no 
power upon their bodies, nor was an hair of their head singed .” 188 

54,7 The Lord said too, in the Gospel, “Therefore I say unto you, Take no 
thought what ye shall eat or what ye shall put on. Is not the soul more than 
meat, and the body than raiment ?’’ 184 ( 8 ) And the apostle proves that he 
understands “body” to mean this body of ours when he says, “Let not sin 
therefore reign in your mortal body .” 188 And again, “If the Spirit of him that 
raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christfrom the 
dead shall quicken your mortal bodies .” 186 ( 9 ) And again, “If the foot shall 
say, Because I am not the hand, I am not of the body, is it therefore not of 
the body ? 187 And again, “And being not weak in faith, Abraham considered 
not his own body now dead. ” 188 And again, “For we must all appear before 
the judgment seat of Christ: that everyone may receive the things done in 
his body according to that he hath done .” 180 ( 10 ) And again, “His letters are 
weighty and powerful; but the presence of his body is weak. ” 190 And again, 
“I knew a man in Christ fourteen years ago, whether in the body, I cannot 

teii, or whether out of the body, I cannot telL ” 191 And again, So men ought 
to love their wives as their own bodies. ” 192 And again, “And the very God of 
peace sanctify you wholly; and I pray God your whole spirit and soul and 
body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. " 193 
54,11 But our opponents have surely realized none of this. They supposed 
the apostle adrift on a stormy sea, as though his thoughts had no harbor 
and anchorage, but sailed back andforth making contradictory statements, 
sometimes that the flesh rises, but sometimes that it does not. 

55,1 And so, to omit none of their propositions and hew < the> hydra all 
to pieces, I shall return to the subject. For next, as I promised, I shall put the 
other questions that they raise and show how to answer them, and prove that 
our opponent has said things that are themselves in accord and agreement 
with our faith in the resurrection of the flesh. (2) Let us see, then, what we 
were led at the outset to say of the apostle. As we originally suggested, his 
words, “I was alive without the Law once, ” 194 mean our former life in Para¬ 
dise in our first parents—not without a body but with a body—before the 
commandment. (3) For "God took the dust of the earth and fashioned the 
man ’’ 195 before the giving of the commandment. We livedfree from lust and 
knew no onslaughts of the senseless desire which, with the enticing distrac¬ 
tions of pleasures, impels us to intemperance. (4) For if one has no rule to 
live by, and no control over his own reason, what life can he choose to live, to 
merit just praise or blame? He must be pronounced immune to all charges, 
since one cannot covet things that are notforbidden. (5) And even if he does 
covet them, he will not be charged. “Covet” does not apply to things which are 
accessible and at one’s command, but to accessible things which are not in 
one’s power. How can one desire and itch for a thing which is not withheld 
from him, and which he does not need? Thus < Paul said >, “I had not known 
lust ijthe Law had not said, Thou shalt not covet. ” 196 

55,6 But when our first parents had been told, “Of the tree of the knowl¬ 
edge ofgood and evilye shall not eat, and on the day ye eat thereof, ye shall 
surely die ,” 191 they conceived desire and were infected with it. For one who 
“desires” does not desire the things that he has, controls and uses, but the 

things which are forbidden and barred to him, and which he does not have. 
(7) Thus Paul was right to say, “I had not known lust if the Law had not said, 
Thou shalt not covet”—that is, if “Ye shall not eat thereof,” had not been said. 
This is the way in which sin gained the opportunity and occasion for its entry, 
to mock me and pervert me. 

56,1 For once the commandment had been given, the devil got his oppor¬ 
tunity to produce covetousness in me through the commandment, and cun¬ 
ningly urged and provoked me to descend to the desire for the forbidden. 
(2) “For without a law sin is dead” 198 —that is, there was no way of com¬ 
mitting sin when the commandment had not been given and was not yet in 
existence. “I was” blamelessly “alive ” 199 before the commandment, because 
I had no rule and ordinance to live by, from which it would be sinful for 
me to fall away. (3) “But when the commandment came, sin revived and I 
died. And the commandment, which was ordained to life, Ifound to be unto 
death, ” 200 because once God had given a law and specified what should and 
should not be done, the devil produced covetousness in me. (4) For though 
God’s counsel and the commandment he gave me were meant for life and 
immortality, so that, if I obeyed the commandment and lived by it, I would 
have an untroubled life of the highest eternal beatitude, flourishing forever 
in immortality and joy, its result, because I transgressed it, was my death 
and condemnation. (5) For the devil—whom the apostle called “sin” in this 
instance because he is the artificer and originator of sin—took occasion 
from the commandment, deceived me into disobedience, and after deceiving 
me, killed me by bringing me under the sentence of, “In the day that ye eat 
thereof ye shall surely die .” 201 

56,6 “Wherefore the law is holy, and God’s commandment holy, and just, 
and good ,” 202 because it was given, not to harm but to save. Let us not for 
a moment suppose that God does anything useless or harmful! (7) What, 
then? “Was that which was good”—the commandment I was given to be the 
cause of my greatest good—“made death unto me? God forbid !” 208 God’s 
commandment was not the cause of my enslavement to corruption and the 
writing of the tablets of destruction. It was the devil, to make it clear that he 
had made evil ready for me by means of something good, so that the inven- 

tor and architect of sin would become “exceeding sinful ” 204 and be exposed 
as such, and the < wicked > overseer of the opposite of God’s commandment 
would be distinguished from the good. 

56,8 “For we know that the law is spiritual, ” 205 and can thus be the cause 
of harm to no one; spiritual things have their dwellings farfrom senseless lust 
and sin. (9) “But I am fleshly, sold under sin .’’ 206 That is, since I am fleshly 
and placed as a free agent between good and evil, so that it is in my power to 
do what I will—for scripture says, “I have set before thee life and death 207 — 
then, if I have consented to disobey the spiritual law, or commandment, but 
to obey the material law, or the counsel of the serpent, because of this choice 
I have fallen under sin and am sold to the devil 

56,10 And therefore, after laying siege to me, the evil settles, makes its 
home and lives in my flesh, like a drone in a beehive which often hovers buzz¬ 
ing around it. For because I broke the commandment, the punishment of 
being sold to evil was laid on me. (11) And thus, when I think of things I want 
not to do, “I allow notwhatl do.” For “I know not what I do" and “What I hate, 
that do I ” 208 are not to be taken of actually doing evil, but of merely thinking 
of it. For unseemly thoughts often catch us offguard and cause us to imagine 
things we want not to, since the soul is very much perplexed by thoughts. 

57,1 For to desire wicked things or not desire them is not entirely our 
choice, but we can choose whether or not to implement the desires. We can¬ 
not prevent the thoughts from occurring to us, since they are insinuated into 
us from without to test us; but we can refrain from obeying them or putting 
them into practice. (2) Flow did the apostle do the evil he disliked the most, 
and least of all do the good he liked—unless he was speaking of the pecu¬ 
liar thoughts which, for some unknown reason, we sometimes entertain even 
without intending to? (3) These must be repelled and silenced, or they will 
spread and possess the farthest bounds of our souls. For while these Unger in 
us, the good cannot show itself. 

57,4 The apostle was right, then, to say, “That which I do, I allow not; for 
what I would, that do I not, but what I hate, that do I. ” 209 We want not even 
to think of things that are unseemly and infamous, for perfect good is not 
merely refraining from doing such things, but even from thinking of them. 

(5) And yet this good which we want does not come to fruition; the evil which 
we do not want, does. Countless < thoughts > on countless subjects haunt our 
hearts and often enter them even against our will, filling us with curiosity 
and senseless meddlesomeness. (6) And thus we are capable of wanting not 
to entertain these thoughts, but < not > of banishing them, never to return to 
our minds. For as I said, we do not have the power to do this, but only the 
power to comply with the thoughts or not. 

57.7 Thus the sense of the line, “For the good that I would, I do not ,” 210 is 
something like this: “I want not to think of what is harmful to me, since [not 
to do so] is irreproachable good, “builtfoursquare without blemish by hands 
and heart ,”’ 211 as the saying goes. And “The good that I will, Ido not: but the 
evil that I would not, that do I” means, “I do not want to conceive of them, yet 
I conceive of the things I want not to. ” 

57.8 And < it is worth > asking whether it was for this very reason that 
David besought God—his own disgust at thinking thoughts he did not choose 
to—[and said], "Cleanse thou me from my secret thoughts, and spare thy 
servant strange thoughts. If they get not the dominion over me, then shall 
I be innocent and cleansed of the great sin .” 212 (9) And the apostle himself 
says elsewhere, “Casting down thoughts, and every high thing that exalteth 
itself against the knowledge of God, and bringing every thought into captiv¬ 
ity to the obedience of God. ” 213 

58,1 But suppose someone still ventures to speak up and reply that the 
apostle is teaching that we do the evil we hate and do not want to do, not 
only by thinking but also by actually doing it —(2) since Paul has said, “The 
good that I would I ‘do’ not: but the evil which I would not, that ‘do’ I.” I shall 
require the one who says this to explain, if he is telling the truth, what the evil 
was that the apostle hated and wanted not to do, but still did—and < what > 
the good was that he wanted to do but did not do, but on the contrary, as 
often as he wanted to do this good, he did not do the good he wanted, but 
the evil he did not want. (3) When Paul wanted not to worship idols but to 
worship God, was he unable to worship God as he wanted to, but able to wor¬ 
ship idols as he wanted not to? Or did he not Live the sober life he wanted, 
but a licentious life that was vexatious to him? (4) And in a word, did he 
drink too much, squander his money, grow angry, do injury, and all the rest 

of the evil he wanted not to, but not practice righteousness and holiness as 
he wanted to? 

58,5 Indeed when, in his effort to see righteousness practiced among us 
with no admixture of evil, he urgently exhorts all the members of the churches 
not to transgress, he orders not only that active wrongdoers be reserved for 
destruction and wrath, but their sympathizers as welL (6) In his Epistles he 
often plainly teaches us to turn our backs on these very things and hate them, 
and says, “Be not deceived: neitherfornicators, nor idolaters, nor effeminate, 
nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor drunkards, nor 
covetous, nor revilers, nor extortioners shall inherit the kingdom of God ." 214 
(7) And as his last word, to urge us to shun and reject all sin completely, he 
plainly says, “Be ye imitators of me, as I am of Christ ,” 215 

58.8 Thus the lines we have quoted suggest, not Paul’s actual doing of the 
things he wanted not to, but his mere thinking of them. Otherwise, how could 
he be an exact imitator of Christ? Since savage thoughts often occur to us, 
however, filling us time after time with desires and senseless curiosity “like 
many swarms of buzzing flies, ” 216 Paul said, “What I would not, that do I. ” 217 
One mustfrighten these things away from the soul with a good courage, and 
not even incline to the carrying out of their suggestions. 

58.9 For this troubling of our minds with many thoughts is meant to 
ensure our admission to the kingdom of heaven after being tested with all 
sorts of pleasures and pains—provided that we do not change, but like pure 
gold tried by fire, never departfrom the virtue that becomes us. (10) We must 
therefore resist heroically, like shock troops who pay no heed to their arrows 
and other missiles when they see themselves under siege by enemies, but who 
eagerly charge them, with zeal unflagging in the defense of their city, till 
they put their band to flight and drive it beyond their borders. (11) For you 
see how, because of our indwelling sin, these thoughts from without band 
together against us like mad dogs orfierce, savage bandits, always urged on 
by the despot and chief of wickedness, who is testing our ability to withstand 
and resist them. 

5g,i To work, my soul, or you will yield and be made prisoner, and I will 
have nothing to give in exchange for you! For ‘What shall a man give in 
exchange for his soul?” 2m (2) It would be a good thing — indeed, a most 

happy thing—if we did not have our adversaries and opponents. But as this 
cannot be—it would amount to salvation without effort—and we cannot 
have what we want, for we want not to have allurements to passion; and 
what we want does not materialize, but what we do not want does, since, 
as I said, we need to be tested; let us never, never yield to the evil one, my 
soul! (3) Let us “take the whole armor of God” to protect and fight for us, 
and “Let us put on the breastplate of righteousness, have our feet shod with 
the readiness of the Gospel of peace, and above all take the shield offaith, 
wherewith we shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the evil one, and 
the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God, 
that we may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil ” 219 and “cast down 
thoughts and every high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of 
God ;” 220 “for we wrestle not against flesh and blood .” 221 

59,4 I say this because this is the character of the apostle’s writings. There 
is a great deal to say in proof of the orthodoxy and circumspection even 
of every line in this Epistle; but to go over each one from this standpoint 
would take too long. Here I prefer to show simply his character and purpose 
(5) when he says,rightly, “What I would, that do I not; but what I hate, that 
do I. <If then I do that which I would not >, I consent unto the law of God 
that it is good. Now then it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me. 
For I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, the good dwelleth not .” 222 ( 6) For 
you remember the limits we set for ourselves earlier. Even though I am going 
slowly despite my effort to run through everything quickly, although my dis¬ 
course is more prolix than I had expected it would certainly be desirable to 
finish it. Besides, we have not yet reached the end of the subject. 

60,1 Very well, we were saying, if you will recall, that from the moment 
when the man erred and broke the commandment, sin had its beginning 
because of his disobedience, and made its abode in him. (2) Thus a clash 
of impulses first fell upon us, and we were filled with unseemly thoughts. 
Because we had taken a shortcut past God’s commandment we were emp¬ 
tied of God’s inspiration, but filled with the material desire which the coiling 
serpent breathed into us. (3) And so, for our sakes, God devised death for 
the destruction of sin, to keep it from being immortal, as I said, since it had 
appeared in us while we were immortal. 

60.4 Thus in saying “I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, the good 
dweileth not ,” 22,3 the apostle means the sin that, since the transgression, has 
made itself at home in us through desire, the pleasure-loving thoughts of 
which keep springing up around us like new shoots and twigs. (5) For there 
are two kinds of thoughts in us. The one kind arises from the desire which 
lurks in the body, and has been caused, as I said, by the inspiration of the 
material spirit. The other has come from our regardfor the commandment, 
which we have been given to have as an innate natural law, and which urges 
and restores our thoughts to the good. (6) Hence we “delight ” 224 in the law of 
God in our minds—this is what the “inner man” means—but with the desire 
that dwells in the flesh we delight in the devil’s law. For the law which “war- 
reth against and opposeth the law of God” 225 —that is, opposes our mind’s 
desire, our impulse to the good—is the law which is foreverfostering lustful, 
material turns to lawlessness, and is altogether a temptation to pleasures. 

61.1 For it seems plain to me that Paul here assumes the existence of three 
laws. One corresponds to the innate good in us, and he plainly called this the 
“law of the mind." One arises from the assault of the evil and often draws the 
soul to sensual imaginings; Paul said that this “law” is at war with the “law 
of the mind.” (2) Another is the law which corresponds to the sin that has 
become habitual in the flesh because of its lust; this, Paul called the “law of 
sin which dwells in the members." Mounted on this as his steed, the evil one 
often spurs it against us, driving us to wickedness and evil deeds. (3) For the 
law which is breathed into us from without by the evil one and which, through 
the senses, pours into the soul itself like a stream ofpitch, is strengthened by 
the law in the flesh which corresponds with its lust. 

61.4 For it is plain that the better and the worse are within ourselves, and 
that, when that which is by nature better becomes stronger than that which 
is worse, the mind as a whole is swayed to the good. But when the worse is 
larger and weighs us down—the thing which is said to be at war with the 
good in us—the man, again, is led to all sorts of imaginings and to the worse 
sort of thoughts. 

62.1 Because of this very law the apostle prays for rescue; like the prophet 
who said, “Cleanse thou me from my secret sins ,” 226 he regards it as death 
and destruction. (2) His words themselves prove as much; he says, “I delight 
in the law of God after mine inner man, but I see another law in my members, 

warring against the Law of my mind and bringing me into captivity to the Law 
of sin, which is in my members. 0 wretched man that I am! Who shall deliver 
me from this body of death ?” 227 (3) Paul does not term the body “death,” but 
the law of sin in the members < of the body >, which lurks in us because of 
the transgression and is always inciting the soul’s imagination to the “death” 
of wickedness. 

62.4 At once, no doubt undone by the sort of death from which he was 
yearning for rescue, he also adds who his rescuer was: “I thank God through 
Jesus Christ .” 228 We must note, Aglaophon, that if, as you people have sup¬ 
posed, he meant that this body is death, he would not be inviting Christ to 
rescue him later from such an evil. What more peculiar, or even more than 
peculiar outcome could we have from Christ’s coming? 

62.5 And why ever did the apostle say that he could be freed from this 
“death” by God through the coming of Christ, when, in fact, death was every¬ 
one’s lot even before Christ entered the world? (6) For everyone was "rescued” 
from their bodies by being separatedfrom them on their departure from this 
life. And all the souls likewise—of faithless andfaithful, of unjust andjust — 
were separated from their bodies on the day of their death. (7) What more 
than the others—who had Lived in unbelief—was the apostle anxious to get? 
Or if he supposed that the body is the death of the soul, why did he pray for 
deliverance from the body, which he would surely get even against his will, 
just as death and the separation of their souls from their bodies is the lot of 
everyone? 

62,8 And so, Aglaophon, he does not mean that this body is death, but 
that the sin which lives < within > the body through lust is death—the sin 
from which God delivered him by the coming of Christ. (9) “For the law of 
the Spirit of life in Christ fesus hath made us free from the Law of sin and 
death, ” 229 so that “Fie that raised up Jesus from the dead may also quicken 
our mortal bodies because of his Spirit that dwelleth in us ," 230 (10) “with the 
sin in the body condemned" to destruction, “so that the requirement of the 
law ” 231 of nature, which attracts us to the good as the commandment directs, 
may be set alight and made visible. For before Christ’s coming when the flesh 
was controlled by sin, this smoldered feebly under a heap of material cares. 
(11) For God gave new strength to “the impotence of the natural law within 

us, while it was feeble " 232 from its defeat by the lust in our bodies. For he 
sent his Son to take a flesh like our sinful flesh—that which appeared was 
real, not an illusion —(12) so that, with sin condemned to destruction so as 
to “bring forth” no more “fruit " 233 in the flesh, the requirement of the law of 
nature would be fulfilled. It would have grown, through obedience, in those 
who followed, not the desire of the flesh, but the desire and guidance of the 
Spirit. (13) For “the law of the Spirit of life,” which is the Gospel and is differ¬ 
entfrom the other laws and meant to foster obedience and the forgiveness of 
sins through the proclamation of it, “hath set us free from the law of sin and 
death ,” 234 and entirely conquered the sin which rules the flesh. 

62,14 I have said these things, Theophilus, to clarify the passages which 
they cite even from the words of the apostle, but do not expound correctly. 
But I shall turn to the rest, provided that I can find someone to help me 
through to the end of my discourse. For the material which follows this is 
abstruse, and by no means easy to master. (15) So I undertake the more dif¬ 
ficult part of it, though I can see that the demonstration will be long and 
hard unless a breeze of understanding suddenly blows on us from heaven as 
though we were being tossed in mid-sea, and restores us to a calm harbor 
and a more reliable proof. 

So far the excerpt from Methodius 

63,1 This is the < selection* > of consecutive passages < which I have 
made*> < from > Methodius’, or Eubulius’, < comments* > on Origen and 
the heresy which, with sophistical imposture, Origen puts forward in his 
treatise on resurrection. I believe that my quotation of these passages here 
will do for his silly teachings, and sufficiently refute his < destruction* > 
of men’s < hope* > for life with a malignancy which has been taken from 
pagan superstition and plastered over. (2) For many other things—surely 
even as many more—were also said in his followup of the subject by Meth¬ 
odius, a learned man and a hard fighter for the truth. (3) But since 1 have 
promised to say a few things in its refutation about every sect—there are 
not few of them !—1 content myself with quoting Methodius’ work [only] 
this far. (4) And I, of my poverty, shall add a few more comments of my 
own on Origen’s nonsense and conclude the contest with him, award¬ 
ing the prize to God who gives us the victory and, in his lovingkindness, 

adorns his church at all times with the unfading wreaths of the teachings 
of the truth. So, as best I can, I too shall speak against him. 

63,5 As I have indicated earlier, Mister, you scornfully say, “Was God a 
tanner, to make skin tunics for Adam and Eve when no animals had yet 
been slaughtered? And even if animals had been slaughtered, < there was 
no tanner there. What the scripture meant, then, was* > not skin tunics, 
but the body of earth which surrounds us.” (6) And you are exposed in 
every respect as a follower of the devil’s < inspiration > and the guile of the 
serpent, who brought the corruption of unbelief on mankind, deceived 
Eve, and continues to corrupt the minds of simple people with the villainy 
< of his inspiration > 235 

63,7 Let’s see whether your arguments can stand, then, since you’ve 
worked so hard and carried the struggle of writing so many books out 
to such useless length. (8) For if the story of your composing 6000 books 
is true, 236 you energy-waster, then, after expending all that futile effort 
on lampoons and useless tricks and rendering your work valueless and 
empty, you made the toil of your trafficking profitless by being mistaken 
in the main points with which you counterfeited the resurrection. 

63,g For if the body does not rise, the soul will have no inheritance 
either. The fellowship of the body and the soul is one and the same, and 
they have one work. But faithful men exhaust themselves in body and soul 
in their hope of the inheritance after resurrection—and you say there will 
not be one! Our faith is < of no value >, then; and there is no value in our 
hope, though it is in accordance with the apostolic and true promise of 
the Holy Spirit. 

6340 But though you, on the contrary, confess a resurrection yourself, 
since what you have is an illusory appearance and nothing real, you are 
compelled to say nothing but the name. How can we speak of a soul’s “ris¬ 
ing,” when it doesn’t fall and isn’t buried? (11) It is plain from the name 
that the resurrection of the body, which has fallen and been buried, is 
proclaimed, everywhere and in every scripture, by the sons of the truth. 
But if the body doesn’t rise, the resurrection proclaimed by all the scrip¬ 
tures isn’t possible. (r2) And if there is no resurrection, [any] expectation 
of the resurrection of the dead is useless. For there is no resurrection of 
souls, which have not fallen; but there is a resurrection of bodies, which 


235 Holl Tyjs aiiTou E7ii7rvoia;, MSS ev xai? ohjtuv Siavoia?. 

236 Origen’s admirer Rufinus attacked Epiphanius for stating publicly that Origen had 
written 6000 books, and that he, Epiphanius, had read them. Epiphanius denied the charge 
in a lost letter to Jerome. Cf. Jer. C. Rufin. 2.21-22; 3.23. 

have been buried. (13) And even if a portion of the body is raised while a 
portion is laid to rest, how can there be any such portion? There cannot 
be parts of the body which are raised, and parts which are laid to rest and 
left behind. 

63,14 < Anyone with a sound mind can see* > that, [just] because there 
is a spiritual body and an ensouled body, the spiritual body is not one 
thing and the ensouled body something else; the ensouled and the spiri¬ 
tual body are the same. (15) We have ensouled bodies while we are in the 
world and doing the corruptible deeds of the flesh; for in the world we 
are enslaved to the soul in its wicked deeds, as you too have said up to a 
point. (16) When we are raised, however, there is no more enslavement to 
the soul but there is a following of the Spirit, for from that time on they 
have the Earnest 237 as scripture says, “If we live by the Spirit, let us also 
walk by the Spirit; and if we walk by the Spirit, by mortifying the deeds 
of the body we shall live.” 238 (17) There will be no more marriages, no 
more lusts, no more struggles for those who profess continence. There 
will be no more of the transgressions which run counter to purity, and no 
more of the sorts of deeds that are done here; as the Lord says, “They that 
are accounted worthy of that resurrection neither marry nor are given in 
marriage, but are as the angels.” 239 

64.1 And thus Enoch was translated so as not to see death, and was 
not found. But at his translation he didn’t leave his body, or part of his 
body, behind. If he had left his body he would have seen death, but being 
translated with his body, he did not see death. For he is in a living body, 
and because of his translation his state is spiritual, not ensouled, though, 
to be sure, he is in a spiritual body. 

64.2 The same < has been said* > of Elijah, moreover, because he was 
taken up in a chariot of fire and is still in the flesh—but in a spiritual 
flesh which will never again need, < as > it did when it was in this world 
to be fed by ravens, drink from the brook of Kerith, and wear a fleece. 
It is fed by another, spiritual nourishment the supplier of which is God, 
who knows secrets and has created things unseen; and it has food which 
is immortal and pure. 

64.3 And you see that the ensouled body is the same as the spiritual 
body, just as our Lord arose from the dead, not by raising a different body, 

but his own body and not different from his own. But he had changed his 
own actual body to spiritual fineness and united a spiritual whole, and he 
entered where doors were barred, (4) as our bodies here cannot because 
they are gross, and not yet united with spiritual fineness. 

64,5 What was it, then, that entered where doors were barred? Some¬ 
thing other than the crucified body, or the crucified body itself? Surely, 
Origen, you cannot fail to admit that it was the crucified body itself! 
(6) ft refutes you by the clear demonstration it gave to Thomas, telling him 
besides, “Be not faithless, but believing.” 240 For Christ displayed even the 
mark of the nails and the mark of the lance, and left those very wounds 
in his body even though he had joined his body to a single spiritual one¬ 
ness. (7) Thus he could have wiped the wounds away too, but to refute 
you, you madman, he does not. Therefore it was the body which had been 
buried for the three days in the tomb, and which had arisen with him in 
the resurrection. For he displayed bones, skin and flesh, as he said, “See 
that a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have.” 241 

64,8 Why, then, did he enter where doors were barred? Why but to 
prove that the thing they saw was a body, not a spirit—but a spiritual body, 
not a material one, even though it was accompanied by its soul, Godhead, 
and entire incarnate humanity, (g) ft was the same body, but spiritual; 
the same body, once gross, now fine; the same body, once crucified, now 
< brought to life* >; the same body, once conquered, now unconquerable, 
ft was united and commingled with his divine nature and never again 
to be destroyed, but forever abiding, never again to die. (10) For “Christ 
is risen from the dead, the firstfruits of them that slept.” 242 < But once 
risen > “He dieth no more; death hath no more dominion over him.” 243 

65,1 But also, to show you why Christ is called “the firstfruits of them 
that slept” 244 even though he was not the first to rise—Lazarus and the 
widow’s son arose before him by his aid, and others by the aid of Elijah 
and Elisha. (2) But since they all died again after rising, Christ is the first- 
fruits of them that slept. For after his resurrection “He dieth no more,” 245 
since, through his life and lovingkindness, he is to be our resurrection. 246 

65,3 Now if he is the hrstfruits of them that slept, and if his body arose 
in its entirety together with his Godhead, his human nature < must appear 
in its entirety > after its resurrection with none of it left behind,neither 
its body nor anything else. “For thou shalt not leave my soul in hades, 
neither shalt thou give thine holy one to see corruption.” 247 (4) And what 
is said about the soul in hades means that nothing has been left behind; 
but “holy one” is said to show that the holy body has not seen corrup¬ 
tion, but has risen uncorrupted after the three days, forever united with 
incorruption. 

65,5 But Mister, you claim that these bodies are the skin tunics 248 
though the passage nowhere says so. But you say it because of the seeds 
of the Greeks’ heathen teaching which were sown in you to from that 
source, and because of the Greeks’ perverse notion which brought you to 
this and taught you. (6) “For the natural man receiveth not the things of 
the Spirit; for they are foolishness unto him, because they are spiritually 
discerned.” 249 

65,7 If Adam and Eve had gotten the tunics before their disobedience, 
your falsehood would be a plausible one, and deceptive. But since it is 
plain that < the flesh is already there* > at the time of Eve’s fashioning, 
< how can it not be an easy matter to refute your foolishness?* > What 
was Eve fashioned from? From a body, plainly; scripture says, “God cast 
a deep sleep upon Adam and he slept, and God took one of his ribs.” 250 
(8) But a rib is simply a bone; for God built up “flesh in its place.” If flesh 
is mentioned [at this point], how can its creation still be in prospect? 

65,9 And it says earlier, “Let us make man in our image and after our 
likeness.” 251 “And he took dust of the earth,” it says, “and fashioned the 
man.” 252 But dust and flesh are nothing else than body. (10) Then later 
“Adam awoke from his sleep and said, This is bone of my bones and flesh 
of my flesh.” 253 (11) The skin tunics were not there yet—and neither was 
your allegorical falsehood. “Bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh,” 
plainly means that Adam and Eve were bodies, and not bodiless. 

65,12 And “She took of the tree and ate” 254 when she was seduced by 
the serpent and fell into disobedience; and Adam heard the voice of God 
walking in the garden in the evening, and Adam and Eve hid themselves 
among the trees.” And God said to Adam, “Where art thou?” But because 
he was found out, Adam answered, “I heard thy voice and hid, for I am 
naked.” 255 (13) What did he mean by “naked?” Did he mean the soul or the 
body? And what did the fig leaves cover, the soul or the body? 

65.14 Then God said, “And who told thee that thou art naked, if thou 
hast not eaten of the tree of which I commanded thee that of it alone thou 
must not eat?” And Adam said, “The woman whom thou gavest me gave 
unto me and I did eat.” 256 Now where was the woman “given” from if not 
from the side, that is, from Adam’s body —before the tunics were given to 
Adam and Eve! 

65.15 And God said to the woman, “What is this that thou hast done?” 
And she said, “The serpent beguiled me and I did eat, and gave unto my 
husband also.” 257 And God laid the curse on the serpent, the pangs of 
childbirth on the woman, and the eating of bread by his sweat on the 
man. 

65.16 “And afterwards God said, Behold, Adam hath become as one of 
us. [And now] lest he put forth his hand and touch the tree of life and live 
forever.” 258 (17) And do not suppose, hearer, that the Lord said, “Behold, 
Adam hath become as one of us,” as a statement of fact. He said it in 
reproof, to reproach Adam’s vanity for being won round by the deceit of 
the serpent. What Adam had thought would happen, had not happened; 
that is, Adam had not “become as one of us.” From the desire to rise 
higher, Adam had fallen lower. 

65,18 And it was not from envy that God said, “Let us cast him out, 
lest he put forth his hand to the tree of life, and eat, and live forever,” but 
to make sure that the vessel which had been damaged by its own fault 
would not always remain damaged. (19) Like a master potter he reduced 
the vessel with its self-inflicted damage to its raw material, the earth, [to] 
remold the righteous at the resurrection, completely undamaged, immor¬ 
tal in glory, capable of enjoying the kingdom—and remold the unrigh¬ 
teous at the final resurrection, with the ability to undergo the penalty of 

damnation. (20) For God planted nothing evil, never think it! Fie planted 
just the tree, and by his own decree permitted Adam to take its fruit at 
the proper time, when he needed it. 

65.21 But you will retort, “What becomes of ‘In the day in which ye eat 
thereof ye shall surely die,’ 259 if Adam could eat from it? “Ye shall surely 
die’ would apply to him, surely, no matter when he ate from it!” 

65.22 But to the one who says this I reply, “God decreed Adam’s death 
for the transgression he would commit, since, even before giving the com¬ 
mandment, God, < who > knows the future, knew that Adam would be 
deceived and eat of the tree.” (23) Because they are mistaken in this point 
the sects blaspheme God and say, “Some God of the Law! He envied Adam, 
cast him out and said, ‘Let us cast him out, lest he put forth his hand and 
take of the tree of life and live forever!’ ” 260 

65,24 But their stupid idea stands exposed as the false accusation it is. 
Not only did God not forbid them to eat from the tree of life in the begin¬ 
ning; he even encouraged them by saying, “Of every tree in the garden 
thou mayest eat for food.” But the tree of life too was one of “all the trees 
in the garden,” right before Adam’s eyes. (25) Only from the tree of the 
knowledge of good and evil did God forbid them to eat. But Adam’s greedy 
mind disobeyed the commandment instead, from simplicity and < by lis¬ 
tening > to his wife Eve who had been deceived by the devil. 

65,26 Since Adam, then, had become defective by his own doing, God 
did not want him to live forever defective. Like a master potter God chose 
to change the vessel, which had been spoiled by its own doing, back to 
its raw material, and again change it from its material, as though on the 
wheel, at the regeneration, remaking and renewing it with no defects 
so that it could live forever. (27) Hence at first he threatens death,but 
the second time he no longer says “death,” but says, “Dust thou art, and 
unto dust shalt thou return,” 261 “without having consigned the man to 
death.. ,” 262 (28) And after some other material, “And God made tunics of 
skin and clothed Adam and Eve, and cast them out of the garden.” 263 And 
you see, Origen, that your novel nonsense is worthless. How long Adam 
and Eve had had bodies! 

66.1 But if this shows your guilt, you unbeliever and worse, and if you 
cannot receive the grace of the Spirit because of your soulish thinking, 
then tell me how wonderful and astonishing is each thing that God has 
done. (2) How has the heaven been spread out from nothing and hung in 
mid-air? How was the sun made bright, and how were the moon and the 
stars created? From which primal matter was the earth taken, when it was 
made from nothing? From which materials were the mountains hewn? 

66,3 What was the origin of the whole world, which God brought 
forth from nothing? How were the clouds formed, which cover the sky in 
an instant? (4) Where were the gnats and fleas provided from by God’s 
command, for his servant Moses? How did God change Moses’ wooden 
rod into a living serpent that crawled? How was Moses’ hand changed to 
snow? (5) And in Adam’s time too, you unbeliever, God willed, and made 
actual skin tunics without animals, without human craft and any of the 
various sorts of human work—< and > made them for Adam and Eve at 
the moment of his willing them, as he willed at the beginning, and the 
heaven, and all things, were made at that very moment. 

66,6 And for those who care < to choose* > life, salvation can be put 
in a few words and heresy is an easy matter to refute. But for those who 
are unwilling to receive the doctrine of salvation, not even the whole 
aeon would not be time enough for discussion, since, as the sacred oracle 
says, “Their hearing is ever deaf, like the < deaf > adder that stoppeth her 
ears, refusing to receive the voice of the charmer and the spell cast by the 
wise.” 264 However, although what I say here is not extensive, I believe that 
it is of no little value to the sons of the truth. 

67.1 But I shall pass on to the discussion of resurrection which you base 
on the first Psalm. For when you deceive the ignorant, you waster of effort, 
by palming your ideas off on them, and say that some “simple” people 
believe that the impious do not attain resurrection—and when you show 
later how you ask these “simple” people which body will be raised, and 
< mock them by replying* > in your own words for the people you call 
“simple”—< you are compelled >, for I must say this plainly, to call your 
so-called “simple” people “good.” 265 (2) < For > you are not saying this of 
yourself, and no grace is being given to your speech; you say it because 
of the truth, which compels you to give the signs of the superiority and 
goodness of the servants of God! 

67.3 Even the heathen proverb says, “Simple is the speech of the truth.” 
We are accustomed to call the harmless persons, whom the Savior praises 
at many points, “simple.” < For example >, [he says], “Be simple as doves,” 266 
and, “Suffer the little children”—that is, the simplest of all—“to come 
unto me, for of such is the kingdom of heaven.” 267 

67.4 Now the “simple,” as you say, gave you the answer that the resur¬ 
rection is that of this body in which we are enclosed. And when you raise 
a difficulty in reply to this and ask them, “Is it a resurrection of the whole 
body or of a part of it?” they answer, “of the whole body.” (5) But when, in 
your very silly way, you say that this is no good because of the blood that 
is drained from our bodies, and the flesh, hair, and other things that are 
voided through our spittle, nostrils and excrement, there is a great deal 
of trickery in your wrong diagnosis. A better man than I, the venerable 
and most blessed Methodius, has already countered your fabrication with 
many arguments. 

67,6 But you will also hear a bit from my modest self. Anything we 
want, we want perfectly clean; we do not require the excess material 
which is removed from a thing that is clean. (7) Once a garment has been 
woven on the web it is complete and that is what is cut from the warp, 
with < nothing > added to it or removed from it. If it is given to a fuller 
it will not be expected back from the fuller reduced in size; even from 
the fuller we get it back perfectly whole. (8) Thus it is plain to everyone 
that it is entirely the same garment, and has become a smaller body in 
no way but by the removal of the spots and dirt. And surely, since he has 
removed the dirt, we will not demand the garment back from the fuller 
dirty; we shall want the garment itself, untorn, in good condition, and 
perfectly clean. 

67,9 But here is another illustration. You have raised the question 
of the fluid which is drained away by bleedings, illness, excretion, and 
the dribbling of our spittle and nostrils; but you will be refuted from the 
very things you have said. (10) For not just this is in the body; vermin— 
lice and bugs—grow from us, as it were, and are not considered either 
apart from the body or part of the body. (11) And no one has ever hunted 
for a bug shed by the body, or a louse bred from the flesh itself, to keep 
it, but to destroy it. Nor would anyone regard its destruction as a loss. 
(12) <Just so > we shall not make a foolish search for the fluids we 

excrete—though it is often as you say 268 —nor would God return these 
for our reconstitution. He would leave them behind the second time, like 
dirt which is the garment’s dirt but has been removed from the garment 
itself for neatness’ sake. The creator would plainly return the whole gar¬ 
ment by the goodness of his skill, with nothing missing or added; for all 
things are possible to him. 

67.13 But if it were not that way—you, with your brains damaged by 
your long-winded notion! [If it were not that way], our Savior and Lord, 
the Son of God, who came to make our salvation entirely sure, and who 
illustrated our hope mostly in his own person to prove his truthfulness to 
us, could have discarded part of himself and raised part of himself, you 
trouble-maker, in keeping with your destructive fiction and accumulation 
of a host of worthless arguments. 

67.14 For to refute your sort of argument, he himself says at once, 
“Except a grain of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone; 
but if it fall and die, it beareth many grains.” 269 And whom was he calling 
a “grain?” (15) ft is plain to everyone, and the whole world agrees, that he 
was speaking of himself—that is, of the body of the holy flesh which he 
had received from Mary, and of his whole human nature. (16) But he said 
“fall” and “die” of the three-day sleep of his body itself as he says, “Where 
the fallen carcass is, there will the eagles be gathered together” 270 —and 
you yourself will admit it. For his Godhead can never sleep, fall, be mas¬ 
tered, or be changed. 

67,17 And so the grain of wheat died and rose. Well, did the grain rise 
whole, or did a remnant of it rise? Did another grain rise in place of the 
original grain, or did He Who Is himself arise into being? You will surely 
not deny < that the body* > arose, which Joseph had wrapped in a shroud 
and laid in a new tomb. (18) Then who did the angels tell the women had 
risen?—as they say, “Whom seek ye? Jesus of Nazareth? He is risen, he is 
not here. Come, see the place!” 271 This was as much as to say, “Come, see 
the place, and let Origen know that there is no question of a remnant’s 
lying here; the body has risen whole.” (19) And to show you that it has 
risen whole, < scripture says > in refutation of your nonsense, “He is risen. 
He is not here.” For no remnant of him was left behind; the very same 
body < had risen > which had been nailed [to the wood], pierced with the 

lance, seized by the Pharisees, spat upon. (68,1) And why should I give the 
multitudes of arguments that demolish this pitiable wretch and the non¬ 
sense that has been generated in him? As Christ has risen and has raised 
his own body, so he will raise us. 

68,2 For the holy apostle demonstrated our hope on this basis by 
saying, “How say some of you that there is no resurrection of the dead? 
If there is no resurrection of the dead, neither is Christ risen. And if 
Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain and your hope is vain. And 
we are also found false witnesses of God, for we have said that he raised 
up Christ, whom he raised not up, 272 and so on. (3) And later he adds, 
“This corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on 
immortality.” 273 And he didn’t just say “mortal,” or just say “corruptible,” 
or, “the immortal soul.” He said “this corruptible,” with the addition of 
“this;” and “this mortal,” with the addition of “this.” (4) His grain has risen 
itself, whole. A part of him has not risen; he has risen whole, and not as 
a grain different than the first. The very grain that fell in the tomb has 
risen whole. 

68,5 And how can your nonsense have any validity? The sacred scrip¬ 
ture knows of two “grains,” one in the Gospel and one in the Apostle. 
(6) And the one gives the full explanation because of the process that has 
been carried to completion in it, which is the pattern of < our > resurrec¬ 
tion. For by giving this teaching and putting it into practice, the Savior has 
surely done everything to prove it to us. (7) No sooner did he speak of the 
grain than he raised the grain, as a true confirmation of the faith of our 
hope for our resurrection. 

68,8 Here the apostle takes over by the Holy Spirit’s inspiration, once 
more using a grain of wheat to tell us of the saints’ glory after the res¬ 
urrection, and displays their < hope > for the enjoyment of good things. 
(9) He denounces unbelievers with, “But thou wilt say unto me, How are 
the dead raised up? With what body do they come?” 274 And to anyone 
who says such things he replies, “Fool!” For anyone with any doubt of 
resurrection is a fool and has no understanding. (10) Then he says, “or of 
other seeds, and it is not quickened except it die. But God giveth it a body 
as he hath willed, and to every seed its own body. Thou fool, that which 
thou sowest is not quickened except it die. And that which thou sowest, 

thou sowest not the body that shall be, but bare grain, it may chance of 
wheat or of other seeds, and it is not quickened except it die. But God 
giveth it a body as he hath willed, and to every seed its own body 275 

68,11 And you see that the body is not changed. No one sows barley 
and looks for wheat, and no one has sown cummin and gotten barley; 
the thing that is sown is the same as the thing that is raised. (12) But 
if—here, in the case of this perishable wheat which is not under judg¬ 
ment—< some > of it is left below in the ground and its shoot comes up, 
the part that is left behind is of no use, but the thing that comes up from 
it is better. 

68,13 But because of the unbelief of those who do not look for the hope 
of God, Paul chose to display its splendor. In fact, the grain of wheat is 
a very tiny thing. Where are the roots, the bottom parts of it, the stems 
and the joints, in so tiny a grain? Where is such a number of quills, heads, 
sheaths, ears, and grains multiplying? 

69,1 But to put this more clearly by describing things that are like it— 
how could Moses, the son of Jochabed and Amram, pierce the rock with 
his staff, bring water from its impenetrable matter, change something dry 
to something wet? How could he strike the sea, and part it into twelve 
highways in the sea, by < God’s > command? (2) How could he gather so 
many frogs in an instant? How could he send the lice upon the Egyptians? 
How could he mingle the hail with fire? How could he make the blackness 
of a moonless night even darker for the Egyptians? How could he slay the 
Egyptians’ first-born with pestilence? 

69.3 How could he lead the people whose shepherd he was with a pil¬ 
lar of fire? How could he bring the bread of angels by prayer and supplica¬ 
tion? How could he provide the flock of quails, and glut so many myriads 
by God’s command? 

69.4 How could he hear God’s voice? Why was he, among so many 
myriads, privileged to hear God’s voice and talk with God? How could 
he not need the requirements of human nature for forty days and forty 
nights? How could his flesh be changed to the brightness and shining ray 
of the sun, making the people so giddy that the children of Israel could 
not look him in the face? How could his hand, though flesh, be changed 
to snow? (5) How could he bid the earth open its mouth and swallow 
Korah, Dathan, Abiram and Onan (sic!)? (6) Why was he told at the end 

of his life, “Ascend the mount and die there?” 276 Why does no man know 
his sepulcher? Holy writ suggests that Moses’ body was not buried by men 
but, as may reasonably be supposed, by holy angels. (7) And all this was 
while Moses was still in this world and still in this ensouled body—which 
had, at the same time, become fully spiritual. 

69,8 Taking this as the earnest < of our hope, let us use it > as the 
model of the perfect sprouting then, when “It is sown in dishonor, it is 
raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power” 277 is fulfilled, 
(g) For how can something sown without knowing where be anything but 
“weak?” How can something dumped in a grave and heaped with dust, 
something torn, decomposed, and without perception, be anything but 
“dishonored?” 

69,10 How can a thing be anything but “honored,” when it is raised, 
abides forever, and obtains a kingdom in heaven by its hope in God’s 
lovingkindness—where “The righteous” shall shine “as the sun;” 278 where 
they shall be “equal to the angels;” 279 where they shall dance with the 
bridegroom; where Peter and the apostles “shall sit on twelve thrones, 
judging the twelve tribes of Israel;” 280 where the righteous shall receive 
“what eye hath not seen and ear hath not heard, neither hath entered 
into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that 
love him?” 281 (11) Our resurrection, then, rests with God, and so does any 
man’s—righteous and unrighteous, unbeliever and believer, some raised 
to eternal life but some to eternal damnation. 

70,1 Quiet, Babel, you ancient confusion who have been brought to life 
again for us! Quiet, Sodom, and your loud, awful clamor that ascends to 
God! (2) “For the redeemer shall come from Zion, and turn away iniqui¬ 
ties from Jacob,” 282 “The trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall arise,” 283 
and “We shall be caught up to meet him in the air” 284 as < my > better, the 
< venerable and > blessed Methodius, has said, and I myself have added by 
building on the same words. 

70,3 For from the context of each expression one can see what the 
wages are. Though the holy apostle distinguished the natures of the two 
kinds [of saved persons], he united them in one hope with his words, “We 
shall be caught up in the clouds to meet him”—showing that it is actually 
this body < that rises > and not something else; for one who is “caught up” 
has not died. (4) And by indicating that “We shall not precede the resur¬ 
rection of the dead” 285 as proof that what is impossible for men is easy 
and possible for God—“For we, the living, shall not precede them that 
are asleep and their resurrection” 286 —he made it plain that the living are 
caught up as well. This shows, from the living, that the bodies of the dead 
will be raised whole; and from the fact that the dead precede those who 
are alive and remain, it shows what is possible to God. (5) “For the dead 
shall arise, and they that are in the graves shall be raised up,” 287 says the 
prophet. 

But since I do not want to omit what the prophet Ezekiel says about 
resurrection in his own apocryphon, 288 I shall give it here. (6) To give a 
symbolic description of the just judgment in which the soul and the body 
share, Ezekiel says, A king had made soldiers of everyone in his kingdom 
and had no civilians but two, one lame and one blind, and each < of these > 
lived by himself in his own home. (7) When the king gave a marriage feast 
for his son he invited everyone in his kingdom, but despised the two civilians, 
the lame man and the blind man. They were annoyed however, and thought 
of an injury to do the king. 

70.8 Now the king had a garden. The blind man addressed the lame man 
from a distance and said, “How much did we have to eat with the crowds 
who were invited to the celebration? Come on, let’s get back at him for what 
he did to us!” 

“How?" asked the other. 

70.9 And the blind man said “Let’s go into the garden and ruin the plants 
there. ” 

But the lame man said, “And how can I, when I’m lame and can’t [even] 
crawl?” 

And the blind man said, “Can I do anything myself, when I can’t see where 
I’m going? But let’s figure something out.” 

70.10 The lame man plucked the grass nearby him, braided a rope, threw 
it at the blind man, and said, “Grab it, and come here to me by the rope.’’He 
did as he was told, and when he got there, the lame man said, “Here, you be 
my feet and carry me, and I’ll be your eyes and guide you from on top, to the 
right and to the left. ” 

70.11 By so doing they got into the garden, and whether they did it any 
damage or not, their tracks were there to be seen in the garden afterwards. 
(12) And the merry-makers who entered the garden on leaving the wedding 
were surprised to see the tracks in the garden. They told the king and said, 
“All are soldiers inyour kingdom and no one is a civilian. Then why are there 
civilians’ tracks in the garden?” 

70,13 The king was surprised —as the parable in the apocryphon says, 
obviously speaking to men in a riddle. God is not unaware of anything. 
But the story says, Tke king sent for the lame man and the blind man and 
asked the blind man, “Didn’t you go into the garden?” but the blind man 
answered, “Oh, Sir! You see my handicap, you know I can< ‘t > see where I’m 
going!” (14) Then he went to the lame man and asked him, “Didyou go into 
my garden?” But he replied, “Sir, do you want to make me miserable over my 
handicap?” And then judgment was stymied. 

70,15 What did the righteous judge do? Seeing how the two had been put 
together he put the lame man on the blind man and examined them both 
under the lash, and they couldn’t deny the charge. (16) They incriminated 
each other, the lame man by saying to the blind man, “Didn’tyou pick me up 
and carry me?” and the blind man by saying to the lame man, “Weren’tyou 
my eyes?" (17) Thus the body is linked with the soul and the soul with the 
body, for the exposure of their joint work, and there is a full judgment of 
both, the soul and the body; < they are jointly responsible* > for the things 
they have done, whether good or evil. 

70,18 And see—you who care for your salvation—how all the attackers 
of the truth have added to their own wickedness, as the prophet David 
says, “He hath conceived labor and brought forth wrongdoing.” 289 (19) For 
whoever induces labor with heretical notions within him also gives birth 
to wickedness, his own and his followers’: “He hath digged a cistern and 
shoveled it out, and shall himself fall into the pit.” 290 

70,20 But if anyone can reply to all this, let him come on! If anyone 

< cares > to oppose God, let him make the venture! For God is mighty 
and “will not tire, or hunger, or thirst, and there is no finding out of his 
counsel” 291 by which he raises decayed bodies, saves what is lost, quick¬ 
ens what is dead; by which he clothes the corruptible with incorruption, 
brings the fallen seed to resurrection, by his renewing of it brings what has 
been sown and has died to a radiance more glorious. So we find in many 
scriptures where there are hints of our resurrection. 

71.1 In David<’s > Psalm on the rededication of the house of David, the 
prophet aptly said of resurrection—[speaking] as one who awaited what 
was to come and saw it by the Holy Spirit’s inspiration—“I will exalt thee, 
O Lord, for thou hast lifted me up and renewed mine house”—that is, the 
fallen body—“and not made my foes to rejoice over me.” 292 

71.2 By holding every part of the hope [of resurrection] ready, Solomon 
too urged us in riddles to prepare for the next life. He says, “Prepare thy 
works for their end”—by “end” he means departure from this life—“and 
make ready for the held.” 293 [And yet] he directed the admonition to all 
alike—countrymen and townsmen, the learned and the artisans, from 
whom no agricultural labor is expected. (3) Why should linen-weavers, sil¬ 
versmiths, poets and chroniclers prepare to farm? But his cry summoned 
all together without distinction, and said further, “Make ready for the 
held.” < What > can it be suggesting but that the interment of the body, its 
end by burial, is a “held” for everyone, townsmen and countrymen alike? 
(4) And then he says next, meaning the same hope of resurrection, “And 
thou shalt rebuild thine house.” 294 He didn’t say, “Thou shalt build thine 
house;” it was built once by its formation in the womb, when our mothers 
conceived us all at our formation. The resurrection will come from the 
earth, or “held,” to a house that is no longer being “built” but, because of 
its cleansing in the entombed corpse, rebuilt. 

71,5 And as the Savior said, “Destroy this temple, and in three days 
I will raise,” or build, “it.” 295 For he is wisdom, and < excels* > by a “coun¬ 
sel which there is no” human “finding out” 296 By it < he gathers* > our 

< remains* > from inaccessible places, since some of our bodies have been 

scattered as ashes and some in the sea, while some have been destroyed by 
birds of prey, wild beasts, or worms—[gathers us] and brings us < whole 
to regeneration* >. (6) For if God brought the < existent > from non-exis¬ 
tence to existence, how much more easily can he restore the existent to 
the state which is proper to it? In this way he gives a just judgment, and 
will not judge one in another’s place, depriving me of what is mine. 

71,7 For if the enjoyment and inheritance of the kingdom of heaven 
are [only] the soul’s, let the body have what it wants! Gideon and his 
men may live at ease and not be afflicted "in sheepskins and goatskins.” 297 
John, with his garment of camel’s hair, need not labor in vain. Nor need 
we mortify the flesh in holy retirement, master our bodies through purity. 
(8) But if the body is the soul’s partner in its disciplines, purity, fasting and 
other virtues, “God is not” [so] “unrighteous” 298 [as] to deprive the laborer 
of the fruit of his labor, and award no recompense to the body which has 
labored with the soul. 

71.9 [If there is no resurrection of the body], judgment will plainly be 
suspended. For if the soul appears all by itself it can reply to its sentence, 
‘The responsibility for the sin is not mine. Fornication, adultery and wan¬ 
tonness are caused by that corruptible body of earth. For I have done 
none of these things since it left me”—and it will have a good case, and 
undo God’s judgment. 

71.10 And even if God should bring the body to judgment by itself—for 
he can, as I have already shown through Ezekiel 299 For even though the 
action was set in a parable, that kind of thing was done as an allegory of 
the truth that was expressed in the [other] parable, when bone was joined 
to bone and joint to joint and, although the bones were dry and there was 
no soul or spirit in them yet to move them, the bodies were put together 
at once, and made firm by the prophet’s command. (11) And if God so 
wills, he has the power to make this body appear and be moved without 
a soul, as Abel’s blood, which is body, not soul, spoke after his death. (For 
the blood is not soul; anything that can be seen is a body.) 

71,12 But the body cannot be judged without a soul. It too could retort, 
“I didn’t sin, the soul did! Since it was separated from me have I com¬ 
mitted adultery, fornication, idolatry?” And the body would dispute 
God’s righteous judgment, and with reason. (13) For this and many other 

cogent reasons God in his wisdom brings our dead bodies and our souls to 
regeneration by his kindly promises, so that one who has grown weary in 
holiness may receive his whole good reward from God; and those whose 
deeds were worthless may be judged as well, body with soul and soul with 
body. 

71,14 And as a further assurance of our salvation < the Word himself* > 
came in the flesh, took perfect manhood and < appeared among us* >, 
to strengthen his faith within us—foreknowing your future unbelief, Ori- 
gen, and desiring < to confirm* > the doctrine which you doubt more, and 
which is doubted in many sects, the Manichaeans and Marcionites whose 
unbelief is similar to yours. And finally, when he had accomplished every¬ 
thing to confirm and establish his faith and truth in his own person, he 
did [the same things] for all to see. (15) For after rising from the dead 
[himself] he raised many bodies of the saints with him, and they entered 
the holy city with him, as 1 have also described elsewhere. 300 (16) And to 
leave no opportunity for an unfair stratagem, the scripture did not say, 
“the saints arose.” It hastened < to confirm* > that very thing which is 
doubted by unbelievers, and to confirm what we know of salvation said, 
“the bodies of the saints.” (17) And it wasn’t just that he raised them, but 
that they showed < themselves > to many in the city when the words, 
“bringing forth prisoners in manhood” 301 —that is, bringing the souls of 
the risen bodies—had been fulfilled in them by his power. For these were 
the prisoners of the camp, who had been confined in hades. (18) And it 
says, “Likewise them that embitter, the dwellers in graves” 302 to mean the 
bodies of the risen. And he did not say, “them that have been embittered,” 
or “are embittered,” but, “them that embitter.” 

71,19 For when the newly dead, together with the most ancient, 
appeared to many in the city—(I presume that he began the resurrection 
with Adam. And the newly dead < had been buried in the same place, 
Golgotha, and their bodies laid to rest above Adam’s, so that Christ, 
who* > had been crucified < there, raised*> those buried above Adam 
on Golgotha < together with Adam* [himself] >, fulfilling the scripture, 
"Awake, thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ,” who was 
crucified above thee, “shall give thee light.” 303 ) [When the recently dead 
appeared] and other members of their families recognized < them >, at 

first they astonished the beholders. (20) For if a father met a child who 
had risen, or a brother met a brother, or a < kinsman > met a kinsman who 
had died ten or twenty years before, and asked in amazement,’’Aren’t you 
so-and-so, whom we buried here? How have you risen and come back?” 

(21) the newly risen would ask in reply, “What happened here among you 
three days ago, when the earth was shaken?” 

And when the first said, “We arrested a fraud named Jesus who deceived 
the people and crucified him, and that put a stop to the deception,” 

(22) the risen would at last confess the Lord’s grace and truth and say, 
“Woe to you! You have denied and crucified the Author of the world’s 
salvation! He has raised us by the mighty power of his Godhead and man¬ 
hood.” This at last would provide the fulfillment of the sacred scripture, 
“likewise them that embitter, the dwellers in the graves.” (23) For when 
they heard from the risen that they had risen through the Lord Jesus, they 
would feel bitter as death because they had ventured to deny and crucify 
the Author of life. (24) And perhaps the kindly Lord did even this for the 
benefit of those who saw the risen. For I presume that many who were 
pricked in their consciences by seeing the risen, were benefited by it, and 
became believers. You be converted and believe too, you Origenists, and 
stop destroying many with your imposture! 

72,1 But this will be enough about the would-be sage, Origen, who 
named himself Adamantius for no good reason, and his outrage against 
the truth in many points of the faith, the destructive doctrine of his 
clumsy invention. (2) I shall pass his sect by too, beloved, and investigate 
the others next, with my usual plea for God’s aid to my lack of education, 
which will enable me to resist and overcome every voice that is raised in 
vain against the truth, as the holy prophet Isaiah said, (3) “Every voice 
that is raised against thee, all of them shalt thou overcome, but they shall 
be guilty.” 304 I shall thus carry out my promise in God to those who are 
willing to read attentively for exercise in truth, and as a medicine, like an 
antidote, for each wild beast and poisonous snake—I mean these as sym¬ 
bols of the sects—and for this sect of Origenists, which looks like a toad 
noisy from too much moisture which keeps croaking louder and louder. 

72,4 Taking the Lord’s resurrection for a preventive draught, as it were, 
let us spit out the oil of the toad’s poison, and the harm that has been 
done by the noxious creature. (5) For this is what has happened to Origen 
with all his followers, and I mourn him on this account. Ah, how badly you 

have been hurt, and how many others you have hurt—as though you have 
been bitten by a baneful viper, I mean secular education, and become the 
cause of others’ death. 

72,6 Naturalists say that a dormouse hides in its den and bears a 
number of young at once, as many as five and more, but vipers hunt them. 
(7) And if a viper finds the den full, since it cannot eat them all it eats its 
fill of one or two then and there, but punctures the eyes of the rest, and 
after they are blinded brings them food, and feeds them until it is ready to 
take each one out and eat it. (8) But if simple people happen upon such 
creatures and take them for food, they poison themselves with < the > ani¬ 
mals that have been fed on the viper’s venom, (g) And you too, Origen, 
with your mind blinded by your Greek education, have spat out venom 
for your followers, and become poisonous food for them, harming more 
people with the poison by which you yourself have been harmed. 