1,1 A sect of Archontics comes after these although it is to be found in
few places, or only in the province of Palestine. But by now they may also
have brought their poison to Greater Armenia. (2) Moreover, this tare has
already been sown in Lesser Armenia by a man who came from Armenia to live in Palestine during the reign of Constantius at about the time
of his death. His name was Eutactus though he was “disorderly” rather
(than “orderly”), and after learning this wicked doctrine he returned to his
homeland and taught it.
1,3 As I said he got it—like getting poison from an asp—in Palestine
from an old man unworthily named Peter, who used to live in the district
of Eleutheropolis < and > Jerusalem, three mile-stones beyond Hebron;
they call the village Kephar Baricha.
1,4 To begin with, this old man had an extraordinary garment, stuffed
with hypocrisy. For he actually wore a sheep’s fleece on the outside, and it
was not realized that on the inside he was a ravening wolf. He appeared to
be a hermit because he lived in a certain cave, gathered many, supposedly
for the ascetic life, and he was called “father,” if you please, because of his
age and his dress. He had distributed his possessions to the poor, and he
gave alms daily.
1,5 He had belonged to many sects in his early youth but during
Aetius’ episcopate he was accused and convicted of being a Gnostic, and
was then deposed from the presbyterate—at some time he had been made
a presbyter. After his conviction he was banished by Aetius and went to
live in Arabia at Cocabe where the roots of the Ebionites and Nazoraeans
were—as I have indicated of Cocabe in many Sects.
1,6 He returned later, however, as though having come to his senses
with the approach of old age. But he was secretly carrying this poison
within him and went unrecognized by everyone until finally, from things
he had whispered to certain persons, he was exposed for what he was
and anathematized and refuted by my poor self. (7) And after that he took
up residence in the cave, abhorred by all and isolated from the brotherhood
and from most who cared for their salvation.
1,8 This Eutactus—if, indeed, he was “orderly”—was entertained by
this old man on his way home from Egypt, imbibed the old man’s wicked
doctrine and, receiving this poison as choice merchandise, brought it back
to his own country. For as I said, he came from Lesser Armenia, near
Satale. (9) On his return to his homeland, then, he polluted many there, in
Lesser Armenia. For he had unfortunately become acquainted with certain
rich men, with a woman of senatorial rank, and with other persons of
distinction, and through these prominent people he ruined many of his
countrymen. The Lord quickly removed him from the world, only he had
sown his tare.